https://www.osa.state.mn.us/media/ntaaebvs/2025guideschooldistricts.pdf
→ https://www.osa.state.mn.us/media/ntaaebvs/2025guideschooldistricts.pdf
Content-Type: application/pdf

OFFICE OF THE 
STATE AUDITOR
Minnesota Legal Compliance
Audit Guide for 
School Districts 
12/2025 School Districts
ORDER
Pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 6.65, I hereby prescribe the form and scope of the Minnesota Legal Compliance 
Audit Guide for School Districts. The attached audit guide is hereby incorporated in its entirety. The 
audit guide consists of the following sections:
Page 1-1 Depositories of Public Funds and Public Investments,
Page 2-1 Conflicts of Interest,
Page 3-1 Public Indebtedness,
Page 4-1 Contracting - Bid Laws,
Page 5-1 Claims and Disbursements,
Page 6-1 Examples of Independent Auditor’s Reports,
Page 7-1 Uniform Financial Accounting and Reporting Standards 
(UFARS) for Minnesota School Districts and Charter 
Schools,
Page 8-1 School District Miscellaneous Provisions
These sections will comprise the minimum procedures and audit scope for legal compliance for school 
districts in Minnesota.
/s/
Julie Blaha
State Auditor
12/2025 School Districts
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Introduction i 
1. Depositories of Public Funds and Public Investments 1-1
2. Conflicts of Interest 2-1
3. Public Indebtedness 3-1
4. Contracting - Bid Laws 4-1
5. Claims and Disbursements 5-1
6. Examples of Independent Auditor’s Reports 6-1
 Minnesota Legal Compliance
 - School Districts 6-2
 Combined Report
 Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting and on Compliance
 and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements Performed
 in Accordance with Government Auditing Standards 6-4
7. Uniform Financial Accounting and Reporting Standards (UFARS) for
Minnesota School Districts and Charter Schools 7-1
8. School District Miscellaneous Provisions 8-1
12/2025 School Districts
INTRODUCTION
This Legal Compliance Audit Guide was prepared by the Office of the State Auditor pursuant to Minn. 
Stat. § 6.65, in consultation with representatives from the Attorney General’s Office, towns, cities, 
counties, school districts, and private sector public accountants. This Legal Compliance Audit Guide 
establishes minimum compliance guidelines for verification by auditors engaged in the process of auditing 
school districts of the state.
This guide is divided into specific sections and presented in checklist form to assist the auditor of 
government units in the verification of statutory compliance. The guide is not meant to be a complete 
compilation of all laws affecting municipalities or a complete analysis of the laws cited throughout. The 
checklist is meant to act as a reference guide regarding minimum legal compliance, and municipal auditors 
must examine, in addition to applicable laws cited in the guide, those laws creating, granting power to, 
and restricting the municipal entities they are auditing. 
Under each section, except for the initial question establishing the transaction covered by the topic heading 
and except where the explanation of a given question indicates otherwise, all questions should be answered 
in the affirmative. A negative answer indicates a compliance problem, and the user of the checklist is 
directed to the statutory section indicated on the left-hand side of the page. If after examination of the 
appropriate statute, the auditor using this audit guide is still unsure as to whether there has been legal 
compliance, he or she should check with legal counsel before rendering the opinion on compliance 
contained at the end of each section. 
AUDITOR’S REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE
Chapter 6 contains model reports, one of which is to be completed by the auditor following his or her 
completion of the appropriate compliance sections.
These reports or the language from these reports must be issued as part of the audits of the school districts. 
PREPARATION OF MINUTES
Auditing for legal compliance will require a review of the minutes of the governing body. In many 
instances, the minutes will be inadequate histories of the meetings involved. We have, therefore, deemed 
it appropriate to include below a discussion of minutes, so that in those instances where the minutes are 
substandard, auditors can provide a standard to assist clients in the future recording of meeting minutes. 
i
12/2025 School Districts
Minutes may be defined as a record of the “proceedings” of a deliberative body. Various statutes that 
refer to taking or publishing minutes use the term “proceedings” or “official proceedings.” See Minn. 
Stat. §§ 384.09 (counties); 412.151, subd. 1 (statutory cities); 367.11(1) (towns); and 123B.09, subd. 10 
(school districts). The Minnesota Attorney General has used the definition of “proceedings” found at 
Minn. Stat. § 331A.01, subd. 6, in analyzing the clerk’s duties to take minutes. This statute states:
“Proceedings” means the substance of all official actions taken by the governing body of a 
political subdivision at any regular or special meeting, and at minimum includes the subject 
matter of a motion, the persons making and seconding a motion, the roll call vote on a 
motion, the character of resolutions or ordinances offered, including a brief description of 
their subject matter, and whether defeated or adopted.
While minutes must specifically identify the actions taken by the body, they need not record the 
discussions of the members and others. At a minimum, the minutes must include the information required 
by Minn. Stat. ch. 13D [Minnesota Open Meeting Law], unless such information is recorded elsewhere. 
Minn. Stat. § 13D.01, subd. 4, provides: 
The votes of the members of the state agency, board, commission, or department; or of the 
governing body, committee, subcommittee, board, department, or commission on an action 
taken in a meeting required by this section to be open to the public must be recorded in a 
journal or minutes. . . The vote of each member must be recorded on each appropriation 
of money, except for payments of judgments, claims, and amounts fixed by statute.
In addition, subd. 5 states, “[t]he journal or any minutes used to record votes of a meeting subject to this 
chapter must be open to the public during all normal business hours where records of the public body are 
kept.” 
The above provision requires that the individual votes of each member of the governing body on “an 
action” be specifically recorded except for votes on “payments of judgments, claims, and amounts fixed 
by statute.”
Having satisfied minimum requirements, the question of how elaborate and extensive the minutes should 
be is largely a policy matter for determination by the particular body in the exercise of reasonable 
judgment and discretion. The Attorney General has explained:
...there may be circumstances in which it would be advisable for the town board to provide 
for the minutes to include information over and above what is necessary to satisfy 
minimum statutory requirements for a record of its official actions. 
Op. Atty. Gen. 851-C, March 5, 1992. For example, the board’s reasons for reaching a particular decision 
could be crucial in defending a challenge to the action taken. The inclusion of such information may be 
deemed appropriate under other circumstances, such as where the body determines that the public interest 
warrants the award of a particular contract to a bidder other than the lowest bidder.
ii
12/2025 School Districts
In any case, the amount of detail which is appropriate for inclusion in the minutes of a particular body is 
likely to vary, depending upon the nature of the proceedings and the subject matter involved.
While the minutes of a governing body should attempt to furnish relevant information over and above 
bare minimum requirements, they should not, at the same time, be cluttered with unnecessary detail which 
hampers efforts to review or otherwise utilize them at a later date. Perhaps the best standard to be applied 
to the preparation of minutes is the one applied by the courts to the publication of official proceedings, 
i.e., the minutes should be “sufficiently full to fairly set forth the proceedings.” Ketterer v. Indep. Sch. 
Dist. No. 1, 79 N.W.2d 428, 438 (Minn. 1956); See Op. Atty. Gen. 161-a-20, Dec. 17, 1970.
DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS
Minnesota Statutes § 15.17, subd. 1, requires all officers and agencies of the state, counties, cities, towns, 
school districts, municipal subdivisions or corporations, and other public authorities or political entities 
within the state to make and preserve all records necessary for “a full and accurate knowledge of their 
official activities.” The chief administrative officer is responsible for the preservation and care of the 
agency’s government records, which include all “written or printed books, papers, letters, contracts, 
documents, maps, plans, computer-based data, and other records made or received pursuant to law or in 
connection with the transaction of public business.” Minn. Stat. § 15.17, subd. 2. This duty not only 
prohibits destruction, but requires the custodian to take such steps as are necessary to protect public 
records from deterioration, mutilation, loss, or destruction. This statute also requires that all records must 
be delivered to the legal custodian’s successor upon expiration of the term of office or authority. Minn. 
Stat. § 15.17, subd. 3. Additional provisions regarding data practices are found in the Minnesota 
Government Data Practices Act, Minn. Stat., ch. 13.
For political subdivisions having problems with the storage of obsolete records, Minn. Stat. 
§§ 138.163-.25 provide relief. Any person who intentionally and unlawfully removes, mutilates, destroys, 
conceals, alters, defaces or obliterates a public record is guilty of a misdemeanor. Minn. Stat. § 138.225.
Unless a municipality adopts a records retention schedule (and notifies the Minnesota Historical Society), 
it may not destroy public records without the permission of the records disposition panel. Applications 
may be made to the State Archives Department for such permission. For instance, bids with supporting 
documents received by a school district must be kept forever, unless the school district (1) adopts the 
General Records Retention Schedule for School Districts, in which case, the school district must maintain 
these records for the specified period, (2) adopts its own properly approved records retention schedule, or 
(3) receives authority to dispose of the records from the records disposition panel. 
A school district that wishes to adopt the appropriate General Records Retention Schedule can find 
information on the State Archives website.
iii
12/2025 School Districts
For information and assistance in disposing of or transferring government records, contact:
Minnesota Historical Society
State Archives Department
345 Kellogg Boulevard West
St. Paul, Minnesota 55102-1906
(651) 259-3260
http://www.mnhs.org/preserve/records/index.htm
Questions about the Minnesota Government Data Practices Act should be directed to:
Minnesota Department of Administration
Data Practices Office
320 Centennial Office Building
658 Cedar Street
St. Paul, Minnesota 55155
(651) 296-6733
https://mn.gov/admin/data-practices/
In future years, the Minnesota Legal Compliance Audit Guide for School Districts will be updated and 
additional compliance sections may be added. If you have comments or suggestions with regard to future 
editions, please contact us at:
Office of the State Auditor
525 Park Street, Suite 500
St. Paul, Minnesota 55103
(651) 296-2551
(651) 296-4755 (Fax)
http://www.osa.state.mn.us
iv
SCHOOL DISTRICT
DEPOSITORIES OF PUBLIC FUNDS
AND
PUBLIC INVESTMENTS
12/2025 School Districts 1-1
LEGAL COMPLIANCE AUDIT GUIDE
DEPOSITORIES OF PUBLIC FUNDS
AND
PUBLIC INVESTMENTS
Introduction
A government entity that receives and disburses funds may deposit the funds only in financial institutions designated by 
its governing body. The governing body may authorize its treasurer or chief financial officer to make such designations. 
The government entity may deposit funds in amounts that are federally insured or, if it deposits more than this amount, it 
must either have the depository furnish a bond or assign collateral to protect the excess deposit.
“Government entity” for the purpose of this section includes school districts:
Minn. Stat. § 118A.01, subd. 2. This section does not apply to entities whose investment authority is specified under 
Minn. Stat. ch. 11A (Investment of State and Pension Assets), or 356A (Public Pension Fiduciary Responsibility). Id.
“Public funds” for the purpose of this section means all general, special, permanent, trust, or other funds, regardless of 
source or purpose, held or administered by a government entity, unless otherwise restricted. Minn. Stat. § 118A.01, 
subd. 4.
When auditing a school district, complete this section to determine if the school district has properly invested its funds or 
deposited its funds in a properly designated depository with appropriate collateral or bond. 
OPEB Trusts - The assets of a trust created to pay postemployment benefits (giving rise to a liability under GASB 
Stmt. 45) to employees or officers after their termination of service shall be invested and held as provided in Minn. Stat. 
§ 471.6175.
Minn. Stat.
Section
DEPOSITORIES OF PUBLIC FUNDS AND
PUBLIC INVESTMENTS Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 1-2
Part I. Designation of Depository
§ 118A.02, 
subd. 1
A. In the case of a school district:
1. Has each depository of public funds been designated by the government 
entity’s governing body, or by its treasurer or chief financial officer, if the 
governing body has authorized them to make such a designation?
§ 118A.01,
subd. 3
2. Is each depository one of the following:
a. a savings association;
b. a commercial bank;
c. a trust company;
d. a credit union; or
e. an industrial loan and thrift company?
Part II. Insuring or Securing Deposits
§ 118A.03 A. If a school district desires to deposit an amount in excess of deposit insurance, it 
must obtain a bond or collateral which, when computed at its market value, shall 
be at least ten percent more than the amount of the excess deposit at the close of 
the banking day. For the purpose of this section, “banking day” has the meaning 
given in Federal Reserve Board Regulation CC, 12 C.F.R. § 229.2(f), and 
incorporates a financial institution’s cutoff hour established under Minn. Stat. 
§ 336.4-108. If irrevocable standby letters of credit from Federal Home Loan 
Banks are used as collateral, the amount must be equal to the amount of the excess 
deposit at the close of the banking day.
B. Review the following general principles of FDIC coverage and complete the 
spread sheet in this section to determine the amount of the school district’s funds 
that is not insured and thus need to be either bonded or collateralized. Deposits 
held by credit unions are covered by separate deposit insurance rules promulgated 
by the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA).
General Principles of FDIC coverage:
1. Deposits are insured only if the depository is a member of FDIC.
2. Deposits in one depository are insured separately from deposits in another 
depository which is not a branch of the first one. However, a depository 
and all of the branches associated with it are treated as a single combined 
depository, and the funds deposited in the branches are aggregated for 
purposes of insurance coverage.
Minn. Stat.
Section
DEPOSITORIES OF PUBLIC FUNDS AND
PUBLIC INVESTMENTS Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 1-3
3. The aggregate of a government entity’s time/savings accounts, i.e., savings 
accounts, NOW accounts, and time deposits (CDs), with the same 
depository are insured up to a total of $250,000. The aggregate of a 
government entity’s demand accounts, i.e., non-interest and interestbearing checking accounts, are insured up to a total of $250,000 and are 
insured separately from the government entity’s time/savings deposits. 
This separate $250,000 coverage for demand and time/savings accounts 
only applies if the depository is in the same state as the government entity.
4. A public authority, public corporation, public commission, or special 
district receives separate insurance coverage from its parent government 
entity only if its creation is expressly authorized by state statute, 
government functions have been delegated to it by law, and funds have 
been allocated for its exclusive use and control. Subordinate or nonautonomous divisions, agencies, or boards do not receive separate 
insurance coverage.
5. Funds held for a special purpose and required by law to be paid to 
bondholders or beneficiaries such as members of pension funds or relief 
associations are covered up to $250,000 per bondholder or beneficiary 
whether the beneficial interest is vested or not. The fiduciary nature must 
be indicated on the account name in the bank’s records.
6. If more than one person is legal or official custodian of funds for a 
government entity, each custodian having plenary authority (including 
control) over the funds is separately insured up to $250,000. Also, if the 
same person is the custodian of funds for two separate government 
entities, the funds for the two government entities are separately insured.
7. Moneys held by a government entity in trust are insured separately from 
other government entity funds only if the trust is linked to a written trust 
agreement, court order or statute, the owner does not retain an interest in 
the use of the assets, and the interests of beneficiaries are ascertainable and 
not contingent.
C. Was collateral coverage sufficient? 
(Answer after completing the spreadsheet on page 1-11.)
Part III. The Bond and Collateral
§ 118A.03, 
subd. 1
A. If a bond was furnished by the depository to the school district, answer the 
following question:
1. Was the bond executed by a corporate surety company authorized to do 
business in the state?
§ 118A.03, 
subd. 2
B. If the depository assigned collateral to the school district, answer the following 
questions:
1. Was the collateral one of the following:
a. U.S. government treasury bills, notes, or bonds;
b. issues of a U.S. government agency or instrumentality that are quoted 
by a recognized industry quotation service available to the government 
entity;
Minn. Stat.
Section
DEPOSITORIES OF PUBLIC FUNDS AND
PUBLIC INVESTMENTS Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 1-4
c. a general obligation of a state or local government, with taxing powers, 
rated “A” or better;
d. a revenue obligation of a state or local government, with taxing powers, 
rated “AA” or better;
e. unrated general obligation securities of a local government, with taxing 
powers, pledged as collateral against funds deposited by that same local 
government entity;
f. an irrevocable standby letter of credit issued by a Federal Home Loan 
Bank accompanied by written evidence that the Federal Home Loan 
Bank’s public debt is rated “AA” or better by Moody’s or Standard and 
Poor’s; or
g. time deposits insured by any federal agency?
§ 118A.03,
subd. 7
2. Was the collateral placed for safekeeping:
a. In a restricted account at the Federal Reserve Bank; or
b. in an account at a trust department of a commercial bank or other 
financial institution not owned or controlled by the depository?
3. Did the government entity approve of the selection of the safekeeping 
entity?
§ 118A.03,
subd. 4
4. Was the collateral assignment in writing?
5. Did the assignment provide that, upon default, the depository shall release 
the collateral pledged to the government entity on demand, free of exchange 
or other charges?
§ 118A.03,
subd. 3
C. Collateral pledged must equal at least ten percent more than the uninsured and 
unbonded amount on deposit at the close of the banking day. If irrevocable 
standby letters of credit from Federal Home Loan Banks are used, the amount 
must be equal to the amount of the excess deposit at the close of the banking day. 
The depository may, at its discretion, furnish both a bond and collateral 
aggregating the required amount.
For the purpose of this section, “banking day” has the meaning given in Federal 
Reserve Board Regulation CC, 12 C.F.R. § 229.2(f), and incorporates a financial 
institution’s cutoff hour established under Minn. Stat. § 336.4-108.
1. If a bond was obtained or standby letters of credit from Federal Home Loan 
Banks were pledged, was the amount of excess deposit at the close of the 
banking day (as defined above) equal to or less than the amount of the bond 
or standby letters of credit?
2. If other collateral was pledged, was the amount of collateral at least ten 
percent more than the uninsured amount on deposit at the close of the 
banking day?
Minn. Stat.
Section
DEPOSITORIES OF PUBLIC FUNDS AND
PUBLIC INVESTMENTS Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 1-5
D. Assignment [Federal Statutory Requirements]
[12 U.S.C.
§ 1823(e)]
1. Was the written assignment approved by the depository’s board of directors 
or loan committee?
2. Was the assignment an official record of the depository?
§ 118A.03 E. If the school district used a sweep account, did the timing of the sweep take place 
so that all amounts on deposit at the end of the banking day were protected by 
deposit insurance, bond, or pledged collateral?
Part IV. Public Investments
A. Were all repurchase agreements and reverse repurchase agreements only entered 
into with:
§ 118A.05,
subd. 2
1. a financial institution qualified as a depository of public funds;
2. any other financial institution which is a member of the Federal Reserve 
System and whose combined capital and surplus equals or exceeds 
$10,000,000;
3. a primary reporting dealer in United States government securities to the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York; or 
4. a securities broker-dealer licensed pursuant to chapter 80A, or an affiliate of 
it, regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission and maintaining a 
combined capital and surplus of $40,000,000 or more, exclusive of 
subordinated debt?
§ 118A.06 B. If the school district safekeeps investments with a third party:
1. Is the school district’s ownership of all securities in which the fund is 
invested evidenced by written acknowledgments identifying the securities by 
the names of the issuers, maturity dates, interest rates, CUSIP numbers, or 
other distinguishing marks?
2. Were investments, contracts, and agreements held in safekeeping with:
a. a Federal Reserve Bank;
b. any bank authorized under the laws of the United States or any state to 
exercise corporate trust powers, including, but not limited to, the bank 
from which the investment is purchased;
c. a primary reporting dealer in United States government securities to the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York; or
d. a securities broker-dealer, or an affiliate of it, that
(1) Is registered as a broker-dealer under Chapter 80A or is exempt 
from the registration requirements;
(2) is regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission; and
Minn. Stat.
Section
DEPOSITORIES OF PUBLIC FUNDS AND
PUBLIC INVESTMENTS Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 1-6
(3) maintains insurance through the Security Investor Protection 
Corporation (SIPC) or excess insurance coverage in an amount 
equal to or greater than the value of the securities held?
C. Were the securities sold or pledged under the repurchase agreement or reverse 
repurchase agreement permissible direct investments under Minn. Stat. § 118A.04
(see L and M below)?
D. Were all reverse repurchase agreements only entered into:
§ 118A.05,
subd. 2
1. for a period of 90 days or less; and 
2. only to meet short-term cash needs and not to generate cash for investments?
E. Were all securities lending agreements (including custody agreements) entered 
into only with:
§ 118A.05
subd. 3
1. a financial institution qualified as a depository having an office in 
Minnesota; or
2. a financial institution which is a member of the Federal Reserve System and
whose combined capital and surplus equals or exceeds $10,000,000, and
which has an office in Minnesota?
F. Did the custodian or entity operating the securities lending program only enter into 
securities lending transactions with those entities identified in Part IV.A. (above)?
§ 118A.05, 
subd. 5
G. Guaranteed investment contracts or agreements
1. Were all guaranteed investment contracts or agreements only entered into 
with an issuer or guarantor that was a U.S. commercial bank, a domestic 
branch of a foreign bank, a U.S. insurance company, or its Canadian 
subsidiary, or the domestic affiliates of any of the foregoing?
2. Was the issuer’s or guarantor’s long-term and short-term unsecured debt:
a. rated in one of the highest two categories by a nationally recognized 
rating agency, or
b. was the term of the guaranteed investment contract 18 months or less, 
and was the credit quality of the issuer’s short-term unsecured debt 
rated in the highest category by a nationally recognized rating agency 
(regardless of the credit quality of the issuer’s or guarantor’s long-term 
unsecured debt)?
H. Did all guaranteed investment contracts give the public entity withdrawal rights in 
the event the issuer’s or guarantor’s credit quality was downgraded below “A”?
§ 118A.05, 
subd. 4
I. Did the school district only invest in shares of a Minnesota joint powers 
investment trust whose investments were restricted to securities described in Minn. 
Stat. §§ 118A.04 and 118A.07, subd. 7?
§ 118A.05,
subd. 4
J. Mutual Funds - Did the school district only invest in shares of an investment 
company that met the criteria in either 1 or 2 below:
Minn. Stat.
Section
DEPOSITORIES OF PUBLIC FUNDS AND
PUBLIC INVESTMENTS Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 1-7
1. a. registered under the Federal Investment Company Act of 1940;
b. whose shares were registered under the Federal Securities Act of 1933;
c. whose fund received the highest credit rating;
d. that was rated in one of the highest risk rating categories by at least one 
nationally recognized statistical rating organization; and
e. that only invests in financial instruments with a final maturity no longer 
than 13 months?
2. a. registered under the Federal Investment Company Act of 1940;
b. which holds itself out as a money market fund meeting the conditions 
of SEC rule 2a-7; and
c. is rated one of the two highest rating categories for money market funds 
by at least one nationally recognized statistical rating organization?
§ 118A.05,
subd. 4
K. Did the school district only invest in units of a short-term investment fund:
1. established and administered pursuant to regulation 9 of the Comptroller of 
the Currency; and
2. in which investments are restricted to securities described in Minn. Stat. 
§ 118A.04?
L. Were all other funds invested in instruments which met at least one of the 
following criteria:
§ 118A.04 1. In governmental bonds, notes, bills, mortgages, and other securities, which 
were direct obligations or are guaranteed or insured issues of the United 
States, its agencies, its instrumentalities, or organizations created by an act 
of Congress, excluding mortgage-backed securities defined as “high risk” 
(see Section M - Mortgage-Backed Securities);
2. In a general obligation of a state or local government with taxing powers 
which was rated “A” or better by a national bond rating service;
3. In a revenue obligation of a state or local government which was rated “AA” 
or better by a national bond rating service;
4. In a general obligation of the Minnesota Housing Finance Agency which 
was a moral obligation of the State of Minnesota and is rated “A” or better 
by a national bond rating agency;
5. In an obligation of a school district with an original maturity not exceeding 
13 months which is (i) rated in the highest category by a national bond rating 
service or (ii) enrolled in the credit enhancement program pursuant to Minn. 
Stat. § 126C.55;
[Note: This authority is in addition to and does not limit the authority 
provided by items 2 and 3, above.]
Minn. Stat.
Section
DEPOSITORIES OF PUBLIC FUNDS AND
PUBLIC INVESTMENTS Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 1-8
6. In commercial paper issued by a United States corporation or its Canadian 
subsidiary and that:
a. was rated in the highest quality category by at least two nationally 
recognized rating agencies, and
b. matures in 270 days or less;
§ 118A.04,
subd. 5
7. In time deposits fully insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
or the National Credit Union Administration;
§ 118A.04,
subd. 5
8. In bankers’ acceptances issued by United States banks;
§ 118A.04,
subd. 7
9. In its own temporary obligations issued under Minn. Stat. §§ 429.091, 
subd. 7 (special assessments), 469.178, subd. 5 (tax increment bonds), or 
475.61, subd. 6, or
§136F.91
10. (For counties, cities, towns and other municipal corporations, political 
subdivisions and political bodies) Bonds issued by Minnesota State Colleges 
and Universities under Minn. Stat. §§ 136F.90 to 136F.98?
§ 118A.04,
subd. 8
Note: A debt service fund can purchase any issue payable from the fund.
M. Mortgage-Backed Securities
§ 118A.04,
subd. 2
Government entities may only purchase mortgage-backed securities that are direct 
obligations or guaranteed or insured issues of the United States, its agencies, its 
instrumentalities, or organizations created by an act of Congress.
Mortgage-backed securities purchased shall not be “high risk.” Minn. Stat. 
§ 118A.04, subd. 6, states, “high risk mortgage-backed securities” are:
§ 118A.04,
subds. 2 & 6
1. interest-only or principal-only mortgage-backed securities; and
2. any mortgage derivative security that:
a. has an expected average life greater than ten years; or
b. has an expected average life that:
(1) will extend by more than four years as the result of an immediate 
and sustained parallel shift in the yield curve of plus 300 basis 
points, or
(2) will shorten by more than six years as the result of an immediate 
and sustained parallel shift in the yield curve of minus 300 basis 
points; or
c. will have an estimated change in price of more than 17 percent as the 
result of an immediate and sustained parallel shift in the yield curve of 
plus or minus 300 basis points.
Minn. Stat.
Section
DEPOSITORIES OF PUBLIC FUNDS AND
PUBLIC INVESTMENTS Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 1-9
3. Were all mortgage-backed securities purchased by the school district after 
August 1, 1993, not “high risk?”
Part V. Broker Acknowledgement Certification
§ 118A.04,
subd. 9
A. Annually, prior to completing an initial investment transaction with each broker, 
did the school district provide to that broker a written statement of investment 
restrictions?
B. Did the broker acknowledge receipt of the investment restrictions and agree to 
handle the school district’s account in accordance with the restrictions?
C. Did the school district retain documentation of compliance with A and B above? 
Part VI. Audit Conclusion
The auditor must state a conclusion--based on this questionnaire and any other audit procedures performed--whether the client has 
complied with the legal provisions reviewed relating to depositories of public funds and investments.
Conclusion:
12/2025 School Districts 1-10
SPREADSHEET
a B c d (a+b) - (c+d) = e e x 1.1 = f g g - f
Name of Depository * **
Time/Savings
Accounts
Demand 
Accounts
Amount of 
Insurance 
Coverage
Amount of 
Bond
Deposits Requiring 
Collateral
Amount of 
Collateral 
Needed 
(110% of 
Deposits 
Requiring 
Collateral)
Market Value 
of Collateral 
Provided
Sufficient (Insufficient) 
Collateral Coverage
* Put a check in this column if depository is a member of FDIC or NCUA.
** Put a check in this column if depository is not a branch of any of the other depositories here.
SCHOOL DISTRICT
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
12/2025 School Districts 2-1
LEGAL COMPLIANCE AUDIT GUIDE
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Introduction
Rule: A public officer authorized to take part in the making of a sale, lease, or contract shall not voluntarily have 
a personal financial interest in the transaction or personally benefit financially from it. Minn. Stat. § 471.87. The 
following persons are specifically forbidden from having any interest in any contract made by their respective 
governing bodies:
1. elected officers;
2. town supervisors and town board members;
3. county officials, county deputies, county clerks, and employees of such officials; or
4. school board members.
Exceptions: For practical reasons, the legislature has created certain limited exceptions to the general prohibition. 
Exceptions apply to port authorities, seaway port authorities, economic development authorities, watershed 
districts, soil and water conservation districts, towns, school districts, hospital districts, counties and cities. Minn. 
Stat. § 471.88. Part I of this questionnaire will assist you in making a determination as to whether an otherwise 
forbidden transaction fits within any of the statutory exceptions. Care should be taken to determine whether any 
exception considered applies to the entity and contract being audited. 
For the purposes of this checklist, “interested officer” shall mean a public officer or employee, as listed above, 
who directly or through his or her spouse (see “Discussion” below) has a prohibited position or interest in either 
the entity making or the subject matter of the sale, lease, or contract with the governing body. Examples include:
1. officer;
2. director;
3. employee (see “Discussion” below);
4. partner;
5. owner (complete or partial); or
6. shareholder.
Discussion: The determination as to whether a particular transaction involves an “interested officer” often calls 
for a judgment on the part of the auditor. A helpful concept to remember for analysis is that it is a conflict of 
interest to be on both sides of a contract or transaction.
12/2025 School Districts 2-2
Most problems in this regard arise in the examination of the “interest” the public officer has in the person or entity 
making the contract with the governing body. Two frequent problem areas are:
1. Contracts with Officer’s or Employee’s Spouse or Family Member. 
It is not a conflict of interest per se for a governing body to contract or otherwise economically transact with 
a member officer’s spouse or family member. However, if the facts indicate an economic benefit to the 
member officer as a result of the contract or transaction, a conflict of interest exists. For example, if a 
husband and wife, one of whom is a public officer, share a common pool of funds and likewise share debts, 
conflicts may exist because there is benefit to the public officer or employee flowing from the economic 
benefit to his or her spouse. Likewise, if a governmental officer or employee and his or her spouse, in fact, 
do not economically benefit from each other, a conflict may not exist. This analysis would apply to all 
familial relationships. The auditor will need to factually determine whether an emancipated child living 
away from home has a financial interest with his or her parents.
A provision regarding employee contracts involving spouses of school board members was enacted in 2008. 
See Minn. Stat. § 471.88, subd. 21. 
2. Contracts with Companies in Which the Officer is an Employee. 
If the involved governmental officer or employee is simply a company employee without managerial powers 
and receives the same salary or raise regardless of the company’s contract with the governing body, there 
probably is no conflict of interest. However, if said officer receives a bonus or commission or other benefit 
as a result of the contractual transaction between his or her company and the government entity, there is 
definitely a conflict of interest.
There are numerous aspects to be examined by the auditor in order to understand the totality of interests involved 
in a given contract or transaction between the governing body and an entity or person with a relationship to a 
member officer.
If, after review of the facts and applicable statutes, you are still unsure as to whether a particular set of 
circumstances constitutes a conflict of interest, you should contact an attorney for advice prior to preparing the 
“Audit Conclusion” at the end of this audit guide section.
12/2025 School Districts 2-3
Minn. Stat.
Section
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
Part I. Contracts Generally
§ 471.87 - Unless a statutory exception applies, a public officer who is authorized to take part 
in any manner in making any sale, lease, or contract in official capacity shall not 
voluntarily have a personal financial interest in that sale, lease, or contract or 
personally benefit therefrom.
- The school board may contract for goods or services with an interested officer only 
by unanimous vote. See A, infra. In addition to the unanimous vote, one of the 
statutory exceptions must apply. See B, infra.
§ 471.88,
subd. 1
A. Contract for Goods or Services/Unanimous Approval
1. If there were any sales, leases, or contracts between the school board and an 
interested officer, was each contract a contract for goods or services? and
2. If there were any sales, leases, or contracts between the school board and an 
interested officer, did the school board approve the transaction by 
unanimous vote?
Note: In general, all members present must vote in order to produce a unanimous 
vote; except that the interested officer may abstain (as a practical matter).
B. Statutory Exceptions
§ 471.88,
subd. 2
1. Designation of Bank or Savings Association
If the transaction involved the designation of a bank or savings association 
as an authorized depository for public funds and as a source of borrowing:
a. Did the interested officer disclose to the school board that he or she was 
a director or employee of the bank or savings association?
b. Was such disclosure entered into the minutes of the school board’s 
meeting prior to the first designation of the bank or savings association 
as a depository or at the time of the interested officer’s election, 
whichever was later?
§ 471.88, 
subd. 3
2. Designation of Official Newspaper
If a transaction involved the designation of an official newspaper or 
publication of official matters therein:
a. Was the newspaper in which the officer had an interest the only 
newspaper complying with statutory or charter requirements relating to 
designation or publication?
12/2025 School Districts 2-4
Minn. Stat.
Section
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
§ 471.88,
subd. 4
3. Stockholder of Cooperative Association
If the transaction involved a contract with a cooperative association:
a. Was the officer a shareholder or stockholder and not an officer or 
manager of the cooperative association?
§ 471.88,
subd. 5
4. Contracts That Do Not Need to Be Bid
If an interested officer entered into a contract for goods and services with the 
school board:
a. Was the contract one that did not need to be bid?
(See discussion of contracts that are subject to bidding on page 4-1.) (If the 
interested officer is a school board member and employee of the district, see
Part B.7., infra, “Employment Contracts with School Board Members.” If 
the contract involves a class of employees that includes the spouse of a 
school board member; see Part B.12., infra, “School Board Member 
Spouse/Employee Class.”)
§ 471.89,
subd. 2
b. Did the school board, prior to performance of the contract, authorize 
the contract by adopting a resolution setting forth the essential facts and 
determining that the contract price was as low or lower than the price at 
which the commodity or service could be obtained elsewhere?
§ 471.89,
subd. 3
c. Prior to payment of the contract, did the interested officer file with the 
clerk of the school board an affidavit stating:
(1) the name of the officer and office held;
(2) an itemization of the commodity or services furnished;
(3) the contract price;
(4) the reasonable value;
(5) the interest of the officer in the contract;
(6) that to the best of his/her knowledge and belief the contract price 
was as low or lower than the price at which the commodities or 
services could have been obtained from other sources?
§ 471.89,
subd. 2
d. If the contract was entered into under emergency conditions, did the 
school board adopt such a resolution prior to payment of the claims in 
which the facts of the emergency are also stated?
12/2025 School Districts 2-5
Minn. Stat.
Section
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
§ 123B.195 5. Employment Contracts with School Board Members
If the interested officer was a school board member and an employee of the 
school district:
a. Was the employment contract not reasonably anticipated to exceed 
$20,000 during the fiscal year?
b. Was the contract entered into or renewed at a meeting where all board 
members were present and was the contract approved by a majority?
§ 471.88,
subd. 12
6. Contract for Construction Materials or Services
If an interested officer contracted with the school district to provide 
construction materials or services, or both:
a. Was the contract done by a sealed bid process?
b. Does the unit have a population of 1,000 or less according to the last 
federal census?
c. When the question of the contract came before the school board for 
consideration, did the officer refrain from voting?
§ 471.88,
subd. 13
7. Contract for Renting Space
If a public officer rented space in a public facility, was the rate 
commensurate with that paid by other members of the public?
§ 471.88, 
subd. 21
8. School Board Member Spouse/Employee Class
A local school board may contract with a class of school district employees 
such as teachers or custodians where the spouse of a school board member is 
a member of the class of employees contracting with the school board. If 
this occurred:
a. Did the employee spouse receive no special monetary or other benefit 
that is substantially different from the benefits that other members of 
the class receive under the employment contract?
b. In addition, did the school board:
(1) have a majority of disinterested school board members vote to 
approve the contract,
(2) direct the school board member spouse to abstain from voting to 
approve the contract, and
(3) publicly set out the essential facts of the contract at the meeting 
where the contract is approved?
12/2025 School Districts 2-6
Minn. Stat.
Section
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
§§ 
123B.52, 
subd. 5, 
471.88
9. Conflicts of Interest: All Other Contracts or Transactions
If there were any contracts or transactions between an interested officer and 
the school board, were the contracts or transactions included in the 
exceptions above (B1-10)?
Part II. Purchase of Merchandise from Governmental Agency
§ 15.054 A. Political subdivisions are prohibited from selling property or materials owned by 
the political subdivision to its officers or employees. Employees may make 
purchases from political subdivisions if the following criteria are met.
For all purchases:
1. Was the property or materials purchased by the public employee not needed 
for public purposes?
2. Was the purchase made through sealed bids or public auction?
3. Was the employee not directly involved with the sealed bid or auction 
process?
4 Was the applicable “notice” law followed, and did the same require at least 
one week of published notice?
Minn. Stat. § 15.054 does not apply to property or materials acquired or produced by 
political subdivisions for sale to the general public in the ordinary course of business.
Part III. Audit Conclusion
The auditor must state a conclusion--based on this questionnaire and any other audit procedures performed--whether the client has 
complied with the legal provisions reviewed relating to conflicts of interest.
Conclusion:
SCHOOL DISTRICT
PUBLIC INDEBTEDNESS
12/2025 School Districts 3-1
LEGAL COMPLIANCE AUDIT GUIDE
PUBLIC INDEBTEDNESS
Introduction
The power of a government unit to incur indebtedness is governed by statutory and home rule charter provisions. 
Statutory provisions vary depending on the type of government unit involved.
Each type of borrowing instrument may also be governed by different statutes. Therefore, it is essential that the 
auditor examine the specific statutes or charter provisions that are applicable to the particular borrowing 
transaction.
This questionnaire is intended only to highlight certain general provisions of the Minnesota statutes relating to 
indebtedness and is not intended to cover all questions that may be pertinent.
Which of the following types of borrowing has the municipality been involved with during the past year? 
Please check all forms of borrowing that have either been issued or redeemed during the past year or which 
are currently outstanding at year-end.
During the Year
LONG-TERM BORROWING: Issued Outstanding
 General Obligation Bonds (Minn. Stat. ch. 475)
 Revenue Bonds (Minn. Stat. ch. 475)
 General Obligation Revenue Bonds (Minn. Stat. ch. 475)
During the Year
SHORT-TERM BORROWING: Issued Outstanding
 Aid Anticipation Certificates (Minn. Stat. §§ 126C.52, 126C.53)
 Tax Anticipation Certificates (Minn. Stat. §§ 126C.52, 126C.53)
 Orders Not Paid for Want of Funds (Minn. Stat. § 123B.12)
 Emergency Certificates of Indebtedness (Minn. Stat. § 475.754)
 Certificates of Indebtedness (Minn. Stat. § 123B.61)
 Reverse Repurchase Agreements/Securities Lending Agreements (Minn.
 Stat. § 118A.05)
 Lease Purchase Agreements (Minn. Stat. § 465.71)
Minn. Stat. 
Section
PUBLIC INDEBTEDNESS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 3-2
Part I. Answer the following questions with respect to all types of
indebtedness that were issued during this fiscal year:
§ 475.51, 
et. seq.
A. Was school board approval obtained for new debt issued during this fiscal year?
§ 475.58, 
subd. 2
B. For debt funding or refunding obligations issued under Minn. Stat. § 475.58, 
subd. 2:
1. Did the entity’s outstanding gross debt exceed 1.62% of its estimated market 
value?
2. Was a listing of the indebtedness to be funded or refunded prepared by the 
treasurer and recording officer and filed in the office of the recording officer?
§ 475.58
subd. 2
3. Was the resolution, stating the amount of bonds to be issued and referring to 
the listing of indebtedness to be funded or refunded, published in the legal 
newspaper once each week for two successive weeks?
Note: Refunding obligations may be authorized by Minn. Stat. § 475.67 for which 
the notice required here is not applicable.
C. Considering the issuance of the obligations, will the net debt (as defined in Minn. 
Stat. § 475.51, subd. 4) of the school district not exceed the net debt limit as is 
applicable below:
§ 475.53,
subd. 4
For all school districts does the net debt not exceed 15 percent of the estimated
market value of all taxable property within the district? (Market value is the 
total value of the district as certified by the county auditor or, where 
applicable, this value divided by a ratio certified by the Commissioner of 
Revenue.)
§ 475.58,
subd. 1
D. Was the request to issue the obligations submitted for approval at an election?
§ 475.58,
subd. 4
1. If so, were the proceeds only spent:
a. (1) for the purposes stated in the ballot language; or (2) to pay, redeem, 
or defease obligations and interest, penalties, premiums, and costs of 
issuance of the obligations; and
b. were none of the proceeds spent for a different purpose or for an 
expansion of the original purpose without approval by a majority of the 
electors voting on the question of changing or expanding the purpose of 
the obligations?
§ 475.58,
subd. 1
2
.
If not, was this issuance exempt from approval by the electors for one of the 
following reasons:
It represented an obligation characterized as:
a. any unpaid judgment against the school district;
b. refunding obligations;
Minn. Stat. 
Section
PUBLIC INDEBTEDNESS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 3-3
c. an improvement or improvement program, the obligation for which is 
payable wholly or partly from the proceeds of special assessments levied 
upon property specially benefited by the improvement or by an 
improvement within the improvement program or from tax increments,
including obligations which are the general obligations of the school 
district, if the school district is entitled to reimbursement in whole or in 
part from the proceeds of such special assessments or tax increments and 
not less than 20 percent of the cost of the improvement or the 
improvement program is to be assessed against benefited property or is to 
be paid from the proceeds of federal grant funds or a combination thereof, 
or is estimated to be received from tax increments.
d. an obligation which is payable wholly from the income of revenue 
producing conveniences;
e. an obligation exempt from electoral approval by the terms of the home 
rule charter;
f. exempt under the provisions of a law which permits the issuance of 
obligations of a school district without an election;
g. an obligation to fund pension or retirement fund liabilities of a school 
district pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 475.52, subd. 6;
h. issued under Minn. Stat. §§ 469.1813 to 469.1815 (property tax 
abatement authority bonds), if the bonds are not used for a purpose 
prohibited under § 469.176, subd. 4g, para. (b); 
§ 475.58,
subd. 3a
i. issued to refund existing debt of an indoor ice arena that is used 
predominantly for youth athletic activity as provided in Minn. Stat. 
§ 475.58, subd. 3a;
§ 475.58,
subd. 3b
j. issued for street reconstruction and bituminous overlays, and were the 
conditions of Minn. Stat. § 471.58, subd. 3b met?
§ 475.58,
subd. 1a
E. If the issuance of obligations for the same purpose and in the same amount has 
previously been proposed to the electors and voted down, did this election take place 
at least 180 days after the first election?
F. If this is the third request for the same purpose and in the same amount, did this 
election take place at least one year after the second election?
§ 475.60,
subds. 2 
& 3
G. Was the sale of these obligations in accordance with the public notice and public sale 
requirements of Minnesota statutes?
§ 475.60,
subd. 2
1. If no, was the sale exempt from public sale due to any of the following reasons:
a. obligations issued under the provisions of a home rule charter, or under a 
law specifically authorizing a different method of sale or authorizing them 
to be issued in such a manner as the school board may determine;
b. obligations sold by the school district in an amount not exceeding the total 
sum of $1,200,000 in any 12-month period;
Minn. Stat. 
Section
PUBLIC INDEBTEDNESS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 3-4
c. obligations sold to any board, department, or agency of the United States 
of America or the State of Minnesota, in accordance with the rules of the 
board, department, or agency;
d. obligations issued to fund pension and retirement fund liabilities under 
Minn. Stat. § 475.52, subd. 6; obligations issued with tender options 
under Minn. Stat. § 475.54, subd. 5a; crossover refunding referred to in 
Minn. Stat. § 475.67, subd. 13; and any issue of obligations comprised in 
whole or in part of obligations bearing interest at a rate or rates which 
vary periodically referred to in Minn. Stat. § 475.56;
e. obligations to be issued for a purpose, in a manner, and upon terms and 
conditions authorized by law, if the school board, on the advice of bond 
counsel or special tax counsel, determines that interest on the obligations 
cannot be represented to be excluded from gross income for purposes of 
federal income taxation;
f. obligations issued in the form of an installment purchase contract, lease 
purchase agreement, or other similar agreement;
g. obligations sold under a bond reinvestment program; or
h. obligations which the school board determines shall be sold by private 
negotiation if the school district has retained an independent municipal
adviser?
§ 475.55,
subd. 1
H. Were all obligations signed manually by one officer of the school district or by a 
designated authenticating agent?
§ 475.65 I. Did the treasurer account for the receipt and disbursement of the proceeds of the 
issue, for the use named in the resolution, in a separate fund or account in the official 
financial records of the school district?
§ 475.61,
subd. 2, &
§ 475.62
J. Was the appropriate information reported to the county auditor for all new issues of 
indebtedness so that the county register could be updated? (Information to include: 
the purpose and date of the issue; the number, denomination, interest rate, and 
maturity date of each bond; place and time of payment of principal and interest; and 
the amount of the tax levied for the payment thereof.)
§ 471.69 K. Limitation on Outstanding Warrants and Orders
1. Did the school district, county, statutory city, or town not contract debt, or issue 
any warrant or order in anticipation of taxes levied or to be levied, in excess of:
- the average amount actually received from tax collections for the last 
three years, plus
- ten percent?
The Minn. Stat. § 471.69 limitations do not apply to government entities wherein the 
mineral net tax capacity exceeds 25 percent of its net tax capacity. Nor does it apply to a 
school district in a city of the first class, which constitutes a single school district.
Minn. Stat. 
Section
PUBLIC INDEBTEDNESS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 3-5
Part II. Answer only the questions below that relate to the specific types of 
debt that were issued during the current fiscal year:
§ 475.61,
subd. 1
A. GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS:
1. Did the school district, prior to delivery of the obligations, levy by resolution a 
direct general ad valorem tax upon all taxable property to be spread each year of 
the obligations?
2. For all school districts, were the levies specified and such that if collected in full 
they, together with estimated collection of other revenues pledged for the 
payment of the obligations, will produce five percent in excess of the amount 
needed to meet the principal and interest payments on the obligations, rounded 
to the nearest dollar, when due?
§ 126C.53 B. AID ANTICIPATION CERTIFICATES: (This form of borrowing is available only 
to school districts)
1. Was the approving resolution passed by a two-thirds vote of the board 
membership? (Two-thirds of a quorum is not sufficient.)
§ 126C.54 2. Do the aid anticipation certificates mature no later than three months after the 
close of the school year in which the certificates were issued?
3. Do the aid anticipation certificates mature no later than the estimated date of 
receipt of the aids so anticipated?
§ 126C.52,
subds. 2, 3
4. Was the amount borrowed not in excess of 75 percent of the aids receivable by 
the school district in the fiscal year as estimated and certified by the 
Commissioner of Education?
[Note: For intermediate school districts, this computation may include 
membership fees/tuition from member school districts.]
§§ 126C.52,
126C.53, &
126C.54
C. TAX ANTICIPATION CERTIFICATES: (Statutes relating to school districts only)
1. Was the approving resolution passed by a two-thirds vote of the board 
membership? (Two-thirds of a quorum is not sufficient.)
2. Do tax anticipation certificates mature no later than three months after the close 
of the calendar year in which the certificates were issued?
3. Do tax anticipation certificates mature no later than the estimated date of receipt 
in full of the taxes anticipated?
4. Is the aggregate amount borrowed not more than 75 percent of such taxes which 
are due and payable in the calendar year, and as to which taxes no penalty for 
nonpayment or delinquency has attached?
Minn. Stat. 
Section
PUBLIC INDEBTEDNESS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 3-6
§ 123B.61 D. CERTIFICATES OF INDEBTEDNESS OR CAPITAL NOTES: (School district -
purchase of certain equipment)
1. Were the notes or certificates issued to:
a. purchase vehicles, computers, telephone systems, cable equipment, 
photocopy and office equipment, technological equipment for instruction, or 
other capital equipment having an expected useful life at least as long as the 
terms of the certificates or notes; or
b. purchase computer hardware and software, without regard to its expected 
useful life, whether bundled with machinery or equipment or unbundled, 
together with application development services and training related to the 
use of the computer; or
c. prepay special assessments?
2. Were the notes or certificates payable in not more than 20 years?
3. Did the sum of the tax levies under Minn. Stat. § 123B.61 and § 123B.62 for 
each year not exceed the lesser of (1) the district’s total operating capital 
revenue, or (2) the sum of the district’s levy in the general and community 
service funds, excluding the adjustments under Minn. Stat. § 123B.61 for the 
year preceding the year in which the initial debt service levies are certified?
Was the district’s general fund levy for each year reduced by the sum of (1) the 
amount of the tax levies for debt service certified for each year for payment of the 
principal and interest on the certificates or notes issued under Minn. Stat. § 123B.61
as required by Minn. Stat. § 475.61, and (2) the amount of the tax levies for debt 
service certified for each year for payment of the principal and interest on bonds 
issued under § 123B.62, and (3) any excess amount in the debt redemption fund used 
to retire bonds, certificates, or notes issued under Minn. Stat. §§ 123B.61, .62 after 
April 1, 1997, other than amounts used to pay capitalized interest?
4. If the district’s general fund levy is less than the reduction, was the balance 
deducted first from the district’s community service fund levy, and next from the 
district’s general fund or community service fund levies for the following year?
5. If the district used an excess amount in the debt redemption fund to retire the 
certificates or notes, did the district report this amount to the Commissioner of 
Education by July 15 of the following year?
6. If the district used an excess amount in the debt redemption fund to retire the 
certificates or notes, did the district not have an outstanding capital loan under 
Minn. Stat. § 126C.69?
Part III. Answer the following questions for each type of issue that was 
outstanding at some point during the fiscal year:
§ 475.61,
subd. 1
A. For all school districts, was the certified levy specified and such that it, together 
with estimated collections of other revenues pledged for the payment of the 
obligations, will produce five percent in excess of the amount needed to meet the 
principal and interest payments when due?
Minn. Stat. 
Section
PUBLIC INDEBTEDNESS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 3-7
1. If not, did the board adopt a resolution levying another amount of such taxes?
§ 475.61,
subd. 3
B. For school districts, did the district report to the Commissioner of Education, the 
district’s debt redemption fund balance as of June 30 of the prior year attributable to 
refunding of existing bonds; and
1. Did the commissioner reduce the levies; or
2. Did the school board, with the commissioner’s approval, retain all or part of 
the excess balance?
§ 475.61,
subd. 4
C. 1. For obligations authorized before July 1, 2005, was the amount of any surplus 
remaining in the debt redemption fund of a school district when the obligations 
and interest thereon are paid used to reduce the general fund levies or state 
aids?
2. For obligations authorized on July 1, 2005 or thereafter, was the amount of any 
surplus remaining in the debt service fund of a school district when the 
obligations and interest thereon are paid in full (a) appropriated to any other 
general purpose without any reductions in state aid or levies or (b) used to 
reduce the general fund levies or state aid? 
§ 471.70 D. Has the principal accounting officer of the school district reported, on or before 
February 1st of each year, to the auditor of each county in which the municipality is 
situated, the total amount of outstanding obligations and the purpose for which 
issued, as of December 31st of the preceding year?
Part IV. Audit Conclusion
The auditor must state a conclusion--based on this questionnaire and any other audit procedures performed--whether the client has 
complied with the legal provisions reviewed relating to public indebtedness.
Conclusion:
SCHOOL DISTRICT
CONTRACTING - BID LAWS
12/2025 School Districts 4-1
LEGAL COMPLIANCE AUDIT GUIDE
CONTRACTING - BID LAWS
Introduction
A school district entering into an agreement for the sale or purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or the rental 
thereof, or the construction, alteration, repair or maintenance of real or personal property must abide by the 
statutes relating to contracting and bidding. In addition, for counties, such statutory requirements also apply to 
contracts for “work or labor.”
Complete the questionnaire to determine if the school district conformed to the contracting and bidding statutes.
Minn. Stat. § 471.345, the Uniform Municipal Contracting Law, was established to provide dollar limits for all 
municipalities upon contracts which shall or may be entered into on the basis of competitive bids, quotations, or 
purchase or sale in the open market. Vendors may now submit bids, quotations, and proposals electronically in a 
form and manner required by the municipality. Minn. Stat. § 471.345, subd. 18. Generally, the following 
thresholds apply:
1. For contracts over $175,000 – sealed bids, solicited by public notice and subject to the particular requirements 
of the governmental subdivision. 
2. For contracts from $25,000 to $175,000 – sealed bids or direct negotiation, with two quotations whenever 
possible. 
3. For contracts of $25,000 or less – open market or quotations (with at least two contract quotations, if 
practicable). 
In addition, Minn. Stat. § 471.345, subds. 16 and 17, allow school districts to purchase supplies, materials, and 
equipment using an electronic reverse auction process; and to sell supplies, materials, and equipment which is 
surplus, obsolete, or unused using an electronic selling process.
Best value procurement is a process based on competitive proposals (as an alternative to bids) that awards the 
contract to “the vendor or contractor offering the best value, taking into account the specifications of the request 
for proposals, the price and performance criteria as set forth in Minn. Stat. § 16C.28, subd. 1b, and described in 
the solicitation document.” Minn. Stat. § 16C.28, subd. 1(a)(2). Before administering best value procurement 
procedures, personnel must be trained in the best value RFP process. See Minn. Stat. § 16C.28, subd. 1d.
Another alternative to bidding is the “construction manager at risk” contract available for contracts for 
construction, alteration, repair, or maintenance work. The process of selection of a construction manager at risk 
as well as the requirements of a construction manager at risk contract are set forth in Minn. Stat. § 471.463.
12/2025 School Districts 4-2
Minn. Stat. 
Section
CONTRACTING - BID LAWS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 4-3
Part I. Uniform Municipal and Contracting Law - Applies to All Municipalities
A. Generally, for all school districts:
§ 471.345 The estimated contract amount determines whether sealed bids or quotations are 
required. Vendors may submit bids, quotations, and proposals electronically in a 
form and manner required by the school districts.
1. Contracts over $175,000 (sealed bids or best value procurement)
a. Sealed bids
§ 471.345,
subd. 3
(1) Have all contracts estimated to exceed $175,000 been let on 
sealed bids?
(2) Have the bids been solicited by public notice?
Minn. Stat.
§§ 15.17,
138.17
(3) Were bids preserved and on file if the appropriate records 
retention period has not expired? (See Introduction section 
entitled “Destruction of Records,” pages iii – iv, and the 
entity’s records retention schedule.)
Minn. Stat.
§§ 123B.52,
subd. 1b;
and 
471.345,
subds. 3a,
4a, and 5
b. Best value procurement alternative
§ 16C.28,
sub. 1
If a best value procurement procedure was used as an alternative:
Minn. Stat.
§§ 123B.52,
subd. 1b;
and 
471.345,
subds. 3a,
4a, and 5
(1) Was the contract a contract for construction, building, 
alteration, improvement, repair or maintenance?
§ 16C.28,
subd. 1(c)
(2) Did the solicitation document state the relative weight of price 
and other selection criteria? 
(3) Was the award made to the vendor or contractor offering the 
best value applying the weighted selection criteria? 
(4) If an interview of the vendor’s or contractor’s personnel was 
one of the selection criteria, was the relative weight of the 
interview stated in the solicitation document and applied 
accordingly? Minn. Stat. § 16C.28, subd. 1(c) (2008).
Minn. Stat. 
Section
CONTRACTING - BID LAWS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 4-4
Minn. Stat. 
§ 471.35, 
subd. 2
c. Construction manager at risk alternative.
Minn. Stat. 
§ 471.463
If a construction manager at risk procurement procedure was used as an 
alternative:
(1) Was the contract for the construction, alteration, repair, or 
maintenance work in excess of $175,000?
(2) Was a solicitation of qualifications prepared for each 
construction manager that contained at least the following:
(a) procedures for submitting qualifications, the criteria and 
subcriteria for evaluating the qualifications and the 
relative weight for each criteria and subcriteria, and the 
procedures for making awards in an open, competitive, 
and objective manner, applying a scoring or trade-off 
evaluation method, including a reference to the 
requirements of this section;
(b) the proposed terms and conditions for the contract;
(c) the desired qualifications of the construction manager at 
risk;
(d) the schedule for commencement and completion of the 
project;
(e) any applicable budget limits for the project;
(f) the requirements for insurance and statutorily required 
performance and payment bonds; and
(g) the identification and location of any other information in 
the possession or control of a municipality that the 
municipality determines is material, including surveys, 
soil reports, drawings or models of existing structures, 
environmental studies, photographs, or references to 
public records.
(3) Was the Notice of requests for qualifications advertised in a 
manner designated by the municipality?
(4) Did the municipality create a selection committee composed of 
at least three persons, at least one of whom has construction 
industry expertise?
(5) Did the selection committee review the qualification of each 
proposer and create a short list of two to five proposers?
(6) If the municipality did not receive at least two proposals from 
the construction managers, did it:
(a) solicit new proposals,
Minn. Stat. 
Section
CONTRACTING - BID LAWS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 4-5
(b) revise the request for qualifications, and then solicit new 
proposals using the revised request for qualifications,
(c) select another procurement method, or
(d) reject all proposals?
(7) Did the municipality then issue a request for proposals requiring 
cost and other information from the short-listed proposers?
(8) Did the municipality enter into a guaranteed maximum price 
contract with the construction manager at risk?
2. Contracts from $25,000 to $175,000 can be made on sealed bids, by direct 
negotiation based on quotations, or through best value procurement.
§ 471.345,
subd. 4
a. Sealed bids or quotations
(1) Have contracts estimated to exceed $25,000 but not to exceed 
$175,000 been let on sealed bids or negotiated quotes?
(2) If sealed bids were used, were the requirements of A.1. met?
(3) If quotations were used and obtaining two or more quotes was 
possible, were two or more quotes obtained?
(4) If quotations were used, were the quotations kept on file for at 
least one year?
Minn. Stat.
§§ 123B.52,
subd. 1b;
and 
471.345,
subds. 3a,
4a, and 5
b. Best value procurement alternative
§ 16C.28,
subd. 1
If a best value procurement procedure was used as an alternative:
Minn. Stat.
§§ 123B.52,
subd. 1b;
and 
471.345,
subds. 3a,
4a, and 5
(1) Was the contract a contract for construction, building, 
alteration, improvement, repair or maintenance?
§ 16C.28,
subd. 1(c)
(2) Did the solicitation document state the relative weight of price 
and other selection criteria? 
(3) Was the award made to the vendor or contractor offering the 
best value applying the weighted selection criteria?
 
Minn. Stat. 
Section
CONTRACTING - BID LAWS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 4-6
(4) If an interview of the vendor’s or contractor’s personnel was 
one of the selection criteria, was the relative weight of the 
interview stated in the solicitation document and applied 
accordingly? Minn. Stat. § 16C.28, subd. 1(c) (2008).
3. Contracts estimated to be $25,000 or less may be made either upon 
quotation, in the open market, or through best value procurement.
§ 471.345,
subd. 5
a. If quotations were used, are they on file?
Minn. Stat.
§§ 123B.52,
subd. 1b;
and 
471.345,
subds. 3a,
4a, and 5
b. Best value procurement alternative
§ 16C.28,
subd. 1
If a best value procurement procedure was used as an alternative:
Minn. Stat.
§§ 123B.52,
subd. 1b;
and 
471.345,
subds. 3a,
4a, and 5
(1) Was the contract a contract for construction, building, 
alteration, improvement, repair or maintenance?
§ 16C.28,
subd. 1(c)
(2) Did the solicitation document state the relative weight of price 
and other selection criteria? 
(3) Was the award made to the vendor or contractor offering the 
best value applying the weighted selection criteria?
 
(4) If an interview of the vendor’s or contractor’s personnel was 
one of the selection criteria, was the relative weight of the 
interview stated in the solicitation document and applied 
accordingly? Minn. Stat. § 16C.28, subd. 1(c).
§ 471.345,
subd. 16
B. Reverse Auction Purchase
If the school district contracted to purchase using an electronic purchasing 
process: 
1. Was the purchase a purchase of supplies, materials, or equipment, and not a 
contract for services or a service contract as defined in Minn. Stat. 
§§ 16C.02, subds. 7(a) and 17; and
2. Was the electronic process a purchasing process in which vendors competed 
to provide the supplies, materials, or equipment at the lowest selling price in 
an open and interactive environment?
Minn. Stat. 
Section
CONTRACTING - BID LAWS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 4-7
§ 471.345,
subd. 17
C. Electronic Sale
If the school district contracted to sell using an electronic selling process:
1. Was the sale a sale of supplies, materials, or equipment which was surplus, 
obsolete, or unused; and
2. Was the electronic process a selling process in which purchasers competed 
to purchase the surplus supplies, materials, or equipment at the highest 
purchase price in an open and interactive environment?
§ 331A.03,
subd. 3
D. Alternative Dissemination of Bids and Requests
If, as an alternative to publishing them in a newspaper, a school district
disseminated solicitations of bids, requests for information or requests for 
proposals by using a Web site or recognized industry trade journals:
1. Did the school district simultaneously publish, either in minutes or 
separately, in a notice published in the official newspaper, a description of 
all solicitations or requests so disseminated, along with the means by which 
the disseminations occurred?
2. Was the dissemination by alternative means in substantially the same format 
and for the same period of time as a publication in a qualified newspaper?
3. For the first six months after the school district designated an alternative 
means of dissemination, did it continue to publish solicitation of bids, 
requests for information, and requests for proposals in the official newspaper 
in addition to the alternative method?
4. Did the publication in the official newspaper indicate where to find the 
designated alternative method?
§ 331A.01,
subd. 11
Note: “Recognized industry trade journal” means a printed or digital
publication or Web site that contains building and construction news of 
interest to contractors in this state, or that publishes project advertisements
and bids for review by contractors or other interested bidders in its regular
course of business.
§ 471.345,
subd. 15
E. If the municipality contracted for the purchase of supplies, materials, or 
equipment without regard to competitive bidding requirements, was the purchase 
through the State of Minnesota’s cooperative purchasing venture or a national 
municipal association’s purchasing alliance or cooperative created by a joint 
powers agreement that purchases items from more than one source on the basis of 
competitive bids or competitive quotations?
§ 471.345,
subd. 15
F. For each contract for the purchase of supplies, materials, or equipment over 
$25,000, did the municipality consider the availability, price and quality of 
supplies, materials, or equipment available through the state's cooperative 
purchasing venture before purchasing through another source?
Minn. Stat. 
Section
CONTRACTING - BID LAWS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 4-8
Note: Exceptions to the competitive bidding requirements of Minn. Stat. 
§ 471.345 exist for water tank service contracts, procurement from economically 
disadvantaged persons, shared hospital or ambulance service purchasing, fuel 
contracts for generation of municipal power, procurement from rehabilitation 
facilities, energy efficient projects, solid waste contracts, and town road 
construction or maintenance contracts based on terms of county contracts for 
adjoining roads. If a contract you audit falls into one of these categories, review 
the relevant exceptions to see if its criteria are met. See Minn. Stat. §§ 471.345, 
subds. 5b, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 19; and 400.04.
§ 16C.285 G. Responsible Contractor Requirement
For each construction contract in excess of $50,000, awarded pursuant to a lowest 
responsible bidder or best value process, did the successful contractor submit a 
verification of compliance signed under oath by an owner or officer verifying 
compliance with the minimum criteria set forth in Minn. Stat. § 16C.285, 
subdivision 3 (with the exception of clause (7), as required by Minn. Stat. 
§ 16C.285, subdivision 4?
H. Other Considerations
§ 471.35 1. Specifications on contracts. If sealed bids were solicited, were the 
specifications written so as not to exclude all but one type or kind of 
supplies or equipment?
2. Interest in contract. (See Conflicts of Interest Section, page 2-1.)
§ 574.26 3. Contractor’s performance and payment bonds. Contractors doing public 
work are required to give both a performance bond and a payment bond in 
an amount not less than the contract price if the contract is more than 
$175,000.
a. Were bonds received for all contracts greater than $175,000?
b. Were the amounts sufficient?
Note: The contractor’s performance and payment bond requirement does not 
apply to contracts for snow removal, ice removal, grading, or other similar routine 
road maintenance on town roads.
§ 574.261,
subd. 1a
Note: If the project is under $50,000, contractor may provide for irrevocable 
bank letter of credit in place of a performance bond provided the letter of credit is 
subject to the same conditions as a performance bond.
For school district contracts limited to the purchase of a finished tangible product, 
see note in Part II.D., infra.
§ 471.6161 I. Group Insurance
A school district that provides group insurance for 25 or more employees must 
comply with certain bidding requirements in contracting for or renewing said 
insurance.
§ 43A.316,
subd. 10
Note: School districts participating in the public employee insurance program are 
exempt from the bidding requirements of Minn. Stat. § 471.6161. If this 
exemption does not apply:
Minn. Stat. 
Section
CONTRACTING - BID LAWS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 4-9
§ 471.6161,
subd. 2
1. Was the request for proposals (RFP) in writing?
2. Did the RFP include:
a. the coverage to be provided;
b. the criteria for evaluation of proposals; and
c. the aggregate claims record for the appropriate period?
3. Was the RFP notice placed in a newspaper or trade journal at least 21 days 
before the final date for submitting proposals?
§ 471.6161,
subd. 3
4. Was a written rationale explaining the political subdivision’s decision 
prepared prior to entering into a contract?
§ 471.6161,
subd. 8
5. If the exclusive representative of the largest employment group in the school 
district did not agree otherwise, was the term of the contract two years or 
less?
§ 471.3455 J. Public Safety Equipment Purchase or Lease (Applies to statutory or home rule 
charter cities, counties, towns, special taxing districts or any other political 
subdivision that acquires public safety equipment.)
If equipment was acquired pursuant to this statute without competitive 
bidding or proposals:
1. Was the public safety equipment used, and
2. was the equipment “public safety equipment,” defined as vehicles and 
specialized equipment used by a fire department, as defined in Minn. Stat. 
§ 299N.01, subdivision 2, in firefighting, ambulance and emergency medical 
treatment services, rescue, and hazardous materials response, and
3. was the equipment clearly and legitimately limited to a single source of 
supply? 
§ 471.425,
subd. 4a
K. Did each contract between the school district and a prime contractor require the 
prime contractor to pay subcontractors within ten days of receipt of payment from 
the government entity or pay interest at the rate of 1½ percent per month or any 
part of a month?
Minn. Stat. 
Section
CONTRACTING - BID LAWS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 4-10
§ 15.72
(See also
§ 541.051,
subd. 1(a))
L. Retainage
For a contract for public improvement, a public contracting agency may withhold 
up to five percent of any progress payment as retainage to ensure satisfactory 
performance. If it does so, it must release the retainage no more than 60 days after 
substantial completion.
“Substantial completion” is the date when construction is sufficiently completed so 
that the owner can occupy or use the improvement for the intended purpose. For 
streets, highways, and bridges, “substantial completion” is defined as the date 
when construction-related traffic devices and ongoing inspections are no longer 
required. 
The public contracting agency is permitted to continue to withhold the following 
two amounts even after the 60-day period:
1. up to 250 percent of the cost to correct or complete work known at the time of 
substantial completion, and
2. the greater of $500 or one percent of the value of the contract pending 
submission of final paperwork.
The first amount must be released within 60 days of work completion. The second 
must be released within 60 days of submission of final paperwork.
If the school district withheld retainage in a contract for public improvement, did it 
release the retainage 60 days after substantial completion, except for those amounts 
permitted to be withheld to complete or correct work, and for final paperwork?
§ 270C.66 M. Withholding Affidavit/Certificate
Before making final settlement with any contractor under a contract requiring the 
employment of employees for wages by said contractor and by subcontractors, did 
the school district obtain a certificate by the Commissioner of Revenue that the 
contractor or subcontractor has complied with the withholding requirements of 
Minn. Stat. § 290.92 (either Form IC134 or a Contractor’s Withholding Affidavit 
Confirmation)?
Part II. Laws Relating Specifically to School Districts
§ 123B.52,
subd. 1
A. School Districts (For contracts awarded by bidding)
1. Advertisement for Bids
a. Was two weeks published notice of the request for bids made in the 
official newspaper? (For alternative methods, see Section I.D., 
above.)
b. Did the notice state the time and place for submitting bids?
c. Did the notice include a brief description of the subject matter?
§ 123B.52,
subd. 1
2. Awarding the Contract
Minn. Stat. 
Section
CONTRACTING - BID LAWS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 4-11
a. Was the contract awarded to the lowest responsible bidder?
b. If the contract was not awarded to the lowest bidder, were reasonable 
and appropriate reasons documented in the minutes?
c. Was the contract executed in writing?
d. Was a faithful performance bond received from the contractor?
Note: If the contract is limited to the purchase of a finished tangible product, the board 
may require, at its discretion, a performance bond in the amount it deems necessary.
3. Contract Duration
a. If the contract was a standard requirement price contract awarded on 
bid, did the term of the contract not exceed two years with an option 
on the part of the school district to renew for an additional two years?
Note: Food service contracts in compliance with 7 cfr 210.16 may be renewed 
annually after their initial term for not more than four years. Contracts for the 
transportation of school children or fuel for heating or transportation must not 
exceed ten years.
§ 123B.52,
subd. 1
4. Are records retained on all bids with:
a. the names of the bidders;
b. the amounts of the bids;
c. an indication as to the successful bidder?
§ 123B.52,
subd. 1a
5. If a project labor agreement is used to construct or repair a facility:
a. did the school board adopt at a public meeting a written resolution 
authorizing the project labor agreement? and
b. did the school board publish notice of the meeting in the district’s 
official newspaper at least 30 days in advance?
§ 123B.52,
subd. 1
6. Tie Low Bids or Single Bids
a. In the case of identical low bids from two or more bidders, the board 
may, at its discretion, utilize negotiated procurement methods with the 
tied low bidders for that particular transaction, so long as the price 
paid does not exceed the low tied bid price.
(1) If there were any tie low bids, was the ultimate price paid less 
than or equal to the tie low bid price?
b. In the case where only a single bid is received, the board may, at its 
discretion, negotiate a mutually agreeable contract with the bidder so 
long as the price paid does not exceed the original bid.
Minn. Stat. 
Section
CONTRACTING - BID LAWS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 4-12
(1) If there were any cases of single bids, was the ultimate price 
paid less than or equal to the bid?
§ 123B.52,
subds. 1 & 3
7. Direct Negotiated Contracts
a. Contracts for the purchase of perishable foods. Perishable food items 
(except milk for school lunches and vocational training programs) in 
any amount may be made by direct negotiation with two or more 
quotations received without advertising for bids. Were 
writtenquotations received and were they kept on file for at least one 
year?
b. Contracts for transportation/fuel. A contract for transportation of 
school children or for the purchase of petroleum heating fuel or fuel 
for vehicles may be made by direct negotiation by obtaining two or 
more written quotations when possible or on sealed bids.
(1) If a contract was made by direct negotiations, were quotations 
requested by published notice at least 30 days before the 
contract was awarded?
(2) Were written quotes received and were all quotations kept on 
file for at least one year?
§ 123B.52,
subd. 6
8. School District Surplus Computers Exception
If the school district disposed of a surplus school computer and related 
equipment without complying with the competitive bidding requirements of 
Minn. Stat. § 471.345, did the district: 
Dispose of the surplus computer and related equipment by conveying the 
property and title to another school district, the State Department of 
Corrections, the board of trustees of the Minnesota state colleges and 
universities, the family of a student residing in the district whose total family 
income meets the federal definition of poverty, or a 501(c)(3) charitable 
organization registered with the Attorney General’s Office for educational 
use, or
Sell or give the computer/tablet used primarily by students, to a qualified 
student in accordance with a board resolution made pursuant to Minn. Stat. 
§ 123B.52, subd., 6. Students are eligible to apply for the computer/tablet if 
they are currently enrolled and intend to enroll the year after receipt of the 
computer/tablet. If more students apply than available computers/tablets, 
school must first qualify students from families eligible for free or 
reduced-priced meals, then dispose of the remaining computers/tablets by 
lottery.
§ 123B.52,
subd. 6a
9. Disposition of Surplus Books
If the school district disposed of school books, including library books, and 
textbooks with accompanying materials without following Minn. Stat. 
§§ 471.345, 123B.52 or any other provisions, did it do so by:
a. Donating them to a family of a student residing in the district, or
b. Donating them to a charitable organization under section 501(c)(3) of 
the I.R.S. Code?
Minn. Stat. 
Section
CONTRACTING - BID LAWS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 4-13
Part III. Audit Conclusion
The auditor must state a conclusion--based on this questionnaire and any other audit procedures performed--whether the client has 
complied with the legal provisions reviewed relating to miscellaneous provisions.
Conclusion:
SCHOOL DISTRICT
CLAIMS AND DISBURSEMENTS
12/2025 School Districts 5-1
LEGAL COMPLIANCE AUDIT GUIDE
CLAIMS AND DISBURSEMENTS
Introduction
Municipal transactions involving an account, claim, or demand made for any property or service which can be 
itemized in the ordinary course of business and disbursements of municipal funds are covered in this section.
“Municipality” for the purposes of this section includes school districts. In addition, Minn. Stat. § 471.425
(Prompt Payment of Local Government Bills), applies to school districts. 
Minn. Stat. 
Section
CLAIMS AND DISBURSEMENTS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 5-2
Part I. General Provisions
§ 471.38,
subd. 1
A
.
Has every person, or the person’s agent, claiming payment provided an itemized 
list in writing or electronic transaction record?
§ 471.425,
subd. 2
B. Prompt Payment of Local Government Bills
- Standard payment period is:
- 35 days from receipt for governing boards that meet at least once a 
month;
- 45 days from receipt of goods or services or invoice, whichever is 
later, for governing boards that do not meet at least once per month; 
and
- 45 days from receipt for joint powers entities.
§ 471.425,
subd. 2
1. Were all bills paid within the time period set by the terms of the contract or 
within the standard payment period?
§ 471.425,
subd. 4
- The government entity must pay interest on bills not paid in a timely 
manner. The interest rate is 1½ percent per month or part of a month. 
The minimum monthly interest on a bill of $100 or more is $10.
§ 471.425,
subd. 4
2. For bills paid after the time period set by the contract or the standard payment 
period, did the government entity calculate and pay interest as required by 
law?
Note: The interest penalties in these questions do not apply to good faith 
disputes.
Part II. Electronic Funds Transfer - For School Districts Specifically
§§ 471.38,
subds. 3
and 3a
A. School districts may make electronic funds transfers under certain conditions.
1. A school district may make electronic funds transfers for:
a. a claim for payment from an imprest payroll bank account or 
investment of excess money;
b. payment of tax or aid anticipation certificates;
c. payment of contributions to a pension or retirement fund;
d. vendor payments; and
e. payment of bond principal, bond interest, and a fiscal agent service 
charge from the debt redemption fund.
B. Did the school district use electronic funds transfers only for the above 
enumerated transactions?
Minn. Stat. 
Section
CLAIMS AND DISBURSEMENTS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 5-3
C. Did the school district enact a plan containing the following policy controls 
requiring:
1. annual delegation of authority to make electronic funds transfers to a chief 
financial officer or the officer’s designee?
2. the disbursing bank to keep a certified copy of delegation of authority?
3. identification of the initiator of each electronic transfer?
4. the initiator to document the request and obtain approval for each transfer 
from the chief financial officer or the officer’s designee, before initiating the 
transfer, as required by the internal control policies?
5. written confirmation of each transaction within one business day?
6. a list of transactions to be submitted to the school board at the next regular 
meeting after the transaction?
Part III. Payments With Credit Cards - School Districts
§ 123B.02,
subd. 23
A. If a school district officer or employee made a purchase on behalf of the school 
district by credit card:
1. Had the school district authorized the use of the credit card by the officer or 
employee;
2. Was the officer or employee otherwise authorized to make a purchase on 
behalf of the school district; and
3. Did the purchase otherwise comply with all statutes, rules, and school district 
policies applicable to school district purchases?
B. If a school district officer or employee made a purchase by credit card that was 
not approved by the school district, was the officer or employee held personally 
liable for the amount of the purchase?
Part IV. Audit Conclusion
The auditor must state a conclusion--based on this questionnaire and any other audit procedures performed--whether the client has 
complied with the legal provisions reviewed relating to claims and disbursements.
Conclusion:
School District
Examples of Independent Auditor’s Reports
12/2025 School Districts 6-1
Legal Compliance Audit Guide
Examples of Independent Auditor’s Reports
Minnesota Legal Compliance
 School Districts – Government Auditing Standards 6-2
Combined Report
 Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting 
 and on Compliance and Other Matters Based on an Audit
 of Financial Statements Performed in Accordance with
 Government Auditing Standards 6-4
12/2025 School Districts 6-2
Independent auditor’s report for school districts. (Note: Eliminate this paragraph in red before issuing 
the report. Professional guidance can be found at AU-C 806.)
Minnesota Legal Compliance
Independent Auditor’s Report
(School Board)
(School District)
We have audited, in accordance with the auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of 
America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards,
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the financial statements of the (list related
opinion units) of (district name) as of and for the year ended June 30, 2026, and the related notes to the 
financial statements, which collectively comprise the District’s basic financial statements, and have 
issued our report thereon dated __________.
In connection with our audit, nothing came to our attention that caused us to believe that (district 
name) failed to comply with the provisions of the contracting – bid laws, depositories of public funds 
and public investments, conflicts of interest, public indebtedness, claims and disbursements, 
miscellaneous provisions, and uniform financial accounting and reporting standards for Minnesota 
school districts (UFARS) (delete sections not required to test) sections of the Minnesota Legal 
Compliance Audit Guide for School Districts, promulgated by the State Auditor pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 
6.65, insofar as they relate to accounting matters. However, our audit was not directed primarily toward 
obtaining knowledge of such noncompliance. Accordingly, had we performed additional procedures, 
other matters may have come to our attention regarding the District’s noncompliance with the above 
referenced provisions, insofar as they relate to accounting matters. 
• If legal compliance findings are reported, use the following wording:
In connection with our audit, we noted that (district name) failed to comply with provisions of the (list 
section titles of guide in which noncompliance was identified) of the Minnesota Legal Compliance Audit 
Guide for School Districts, promulgated by the State Auditor pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 6.65, insofar as 
they relate to accounting matters as described in the (schedule name where findings are listed) as items 
(list related finding reference numbers). Also, in connection with our audit, nothing came to our 
attention that caused us to believe that (district name) failed to comply with the provisions of the 
contracting – bid laws, depositories of public funds and public investments, conflicts of interest, public 
indebtedness, claims and disbursements, miscellaneous provisions, and uniform financial accounting 
and reporting standards for Minnesota school districts (UFARS) (delete sections not required to test & 
delete any section titles that identified reported findings) sections of the Minnesota Legal Compliance 
Audit Guide for School Districts, insofar as they relate to accounting matters. However, our audit was not 
directed primarily toward obtaining knowledge of such noncompliance. Accordingly, had we performed 
additional procedures, other matters may have come to our attention regarding the District’s 
noncompliance with the above referenced provisions, insofar as they relate to accounting matters.
12/2025 School Districts 6-3
Government Auditing Standards requires the auditor to perform limited procedures on the (district 
name)’s response to the legal compliance findings identified in our audit and described in the 
accompanying (name of report where the responses/corrective action plans are included). The District’s 
response was not subjected to the other auditing procedures applied in the audit of the financial 
statements and, accordingly, we express no opinion on the response.
[Leave out if no findings and no responses are included.]
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of compliance and the results of 
that testing, and not to provide an opinion on compliance. Accordingly, this communication is not 
suitable for any other purpose. 
(Signature)
(Date)
12/2025 School Districts 6-4
Auditor’s internal control and compliance report based on an audit of financial statements performed in 
accordance with Government Auditing Standards and the Minnesota Legal Compliance Audit Guide for 
School Districts. (Note: Eliminate this paragraph in red before issuing the report.)
Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting and on Compliance and
Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements Performed in
Accordance with Government Auditing Standards
Independent Auditor’s Report
(School Board)
(School District)
We have audited, in accordance with the auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of 
America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards,
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the financial statements of (list related opinion 
units) of (district name) as of and for the year ended June 30, 2026, and the related notes to the 
financial statements, which collectively comprise the District’s basic financial statements, and have 
issued our report thereon dated __________. 
Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting*
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered (district name)’s 
internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in 
the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinions on the financial statements, but not for 
the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the District’s internal control over financial 
reporting. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the District’s internal 
control over financial reporting.
A deficiency in internal control over financial reporting exists when the design or operation of a control 
does not allow management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, 
to prevent, or detect and correct, misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, 
or combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting such that there is a reasonable 
possibility that a material misstatement of the District’s financial statements will not be prevented, or 
detected and corrected, on a timely basis. A significant deficiency is a deficiency, or combination of 
deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting that is less severe than a material weakness, yet 
important enough to merit the attention of those charged with governance.
Our consideration of internal control over financial reporting was for the limited purpose described in 
the first paragraph of this section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control 
over financial reporting that might be material weaknesses or significant deficiencies. Given these 
limitations, during our audit we did not identify any deficiencies in internal control over financial 
reporting that we consider to be material weaknesses. However, material weaknesses or significant 
deficiencies may exist that have not been identified.
Report on Compliance and Other Matters**
12/2025 School Districts 6-5
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether (district name)’s financial statements are free 
from material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, 
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements, noncompliance with which could have a direct and 
material effect on the financial statements. However, providing an opinion on compliance with those 
provisions was not an objective of our audit and, accordingly, we do not express such an opinion. The 
results of our tests disclosed no instances of noncompliance or other matters that are required to be 
reported under Government Auditing Standards.
Minnesota Legal Compliance
In connection with our audit, nothing came to our attention that caused us to believe that (district 
name) failed to comply with the provisions of the contracting – bid laws, depositories of public funds 
and public investments, conflicts of interest, public indebtedness, claims and disbursements, 
miscellaneous provisions, and uniform financial accounting and reporting standards for Minnesota 
school districts (UFARS) (delete sections not required to test) sections of the Minnesota Legal 
Compliance Audit Guide for School Districts, promulgated by the State Auditor pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 
6.65, insofar as they relate to accounting matters. However, our audit was not directed primarily toward 
obtaining knowledge of such noncompliance. Accordingly, had we performed additional procedures, 
other matters may have come to our attention regarding the District’s noncompliance with the above 
referenced provisions, insofar as they relate to accounting matters.*** 
[District Name]’s Response to Findings
Government Auditing Standards requires the auditor to perform limited procedures on the (district 
name)’s response to the internal control and legal compliance findings (adjust as necessary for what 
they responded to) identified in our audit and described in the accompanying (name of report where the 
responses/corrective action plans are included). The District’s response was not subjected to the other 
auditing procedures applied in the audit of the financial statements and, accordingly, we express no 
opinion on the response.
[Leave out if no findings and no responses are included.]
Purpose of This Report
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control over financial 
reporting and compliance, and the provisions of the Minnesota Legal Compliance Audit Guide for School 
Districts and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the 
District’s internal control over financial reporting or on compliance. This report is an integral part of an 
audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the District’s internal 
control over financial reporting and compliance. Accordingly, this communication is not suitable for any 
other purpose. 
(Signature)
(Date)
12/2025 School Districts 6-6
*Paragraphs to be used when no significant deficiencies or material weaknesses are identified.
• If significant deficiencies, but no material weaknesses, are identified, use the following wording:
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered (district name)’s 
internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in 
the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinions on the financial statements, but not for 
the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the District’s internal control over financial 
reporting. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the District’s internal 
control over financial reporting.
A deficiency in internal control over financial reporting exists when the design or operation of a control 
does not allow management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, 
to prevent, or detect and correct, misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, 
or combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting such that there is a reasonable 
possibility that a material misstatement of the District’s financial statements will not be prevented, or 
detected and corrected, on a timely basis. A significant deficiency is a deficiency, or combination of 
deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting that is less severe than a material weakness, yet 
important enough to merit the attention of those charged with governance.
Our consideration of internal control over financial reporting was for the limited purpose described in 
the first paragraph of this section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control 
over financial reporting that might be material weaknesses or significant deficiencies and, therefore, 
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies may exist that were not identified. Given these 
limitations, during our audit, we did not identify any deficiencies in internal control over financial 
reporting that we consider to be material weaknesses. We identified certain deficiencies (a deficiency)
in internal control over financial reporting, described in the accompanying (schedule name where 
findings are listed) as items (list related finding numbers) that we consider to be significant deficiencies 
(a significant deficiency). 
• If material weaknesses and no significant deficiencies are identified, use the following wording:
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered (district name)’s 
internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in 
the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinions on the financial statements, but not for 
the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the District’s internal control over financial 
reporting. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the District’s internal 
control over financial reporting.
A deficiency in internal control over financial reporting exists when the design or operation of a control 
does not allow management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, 
to prevent, or detect and correct, misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, 
or combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting such that there is a reasonable 
possibility that a material misstatement of the District’s financial statements will not be prevented, or 
detected and corrected, on a timely basis. A significant deficiency is a deficiency, or combination of 
deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting that is less severe than a material weakness, yet 
important enough to merit the attention of those charged with governance.
Our consideration of internal control over financial reporting was for the limited purpose described in 
the first paragraph of this section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control 
over financial reporting that might be material weaknesses or significant deficiencies and, therefore, 
12/2025 School Districts 6-7
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies may exist that were not identified. We identified certain 
deficiencies (a deficiency) in internal control over financial reporting, described in the accompanying 
(schedule name where findings are listed) as items (list related finding numbers), that we consider to be 
material weaknesses (a material weakness). 
• If material weaknesses and significant deficiencies are identified, use the following wording:
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered (district name)’s 
internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in 
the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinions on the financial statements, but not for 
the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the District’s internal control over financial 
reporting. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the District’s internal 
control over financial reporting.
Our consideration of internal control over financial reporting was for the limited purpose described in 
the preceding paragraph and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control over 
financial reporting that might be material weaknesses or significant deficiencies and, therefore, material 
weaknesses or significant deficiencies may exist that were not identified. However, as described in the 
accompanying (schedule name where findings are listed), we identified certain deficiencies in internal 
control over financial reporting that we consider to be material weaknesses (a material weakness) and 
significant deficiencies (a significant deficiency).
A deficiency in internal control over financial reporting exists when the design or operation of a control 
does not allow management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, 
to prevent, or detect and correct, misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, 
or combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting such that there is a reasonable 
possibility that a material misstatement of the District’s financial statements will not be prevented, or 
detected and corrected, on a timely basis. We consider the deficiencies (deficiency) described in the 
accompanying (schedule name where findings are listed) as items (list related finding numbers) to be 
material weaknesses (a material weakness).
A significant deficiency is a deficiency, or combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial 
reporting that is less severe than a material weakness, yet important enough to merit attention by those 
charged with governance. We consider the deficiencies (deficiency) described in the accompanying 
(schedule name where findings are listed) as items (list related finding numbers) to be significant 
deficiencies (a significant deficiency).
**Paragraph to be used when there are no reportable instances of noncompliance or other matters.
• If instances of noncompliance are reported, use the following wording:
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether (district name)’s financial statements are free 
from material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, 
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements, noncompliance with which could have a direct and 
material effect on the financial statements. However, providing an opinion on compliance with those 
provisions was not an objective of our audit and, accordingly, we do not express such an opinion. The 
results of our tests disclosed instances of noncompliance or other matters that are required to be 
reported under Government Auditing Standards, and which are described in the accompanying 
(schedule name where findings are listed) as items (list related finding numbers).
***Paragraph when there are no legal compliance findings.
12/2025 School Districts 6-8
• If legal compliance findings are reported, use the following wording:
In connection with our audit, we noted that (district name) failed to comply with provisions of the (list 
section titles of guide in which noncompliance was identified) of the Minnesota Legal Compliance Audit 
Guide for School Districts, promulgated by the State Auditor pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 6.65, insofar as 
they relate to accounting matters as described in the (schedule name where findings are listed) as items 
(list related finding reference numbers). Also, in connection with our audit, nothing came to our 
attention that caused us to believe that (district name) failed to comply with the provisions of the 
contracting – bid laws, depositories of public funds and public investments, conflicts of interest, public 
indebtedness, claims and disbursements, miscellaneous provisions, and uniform financial accounting 
and reporting standards for Minnesota school districts (UFARS) (delete sections not required to test & 
delete any section titles that identified reported findings) sections of the Minnesota Legal Compliance 
Audit Guide for School Districts, insofar as they relate to accounting matters. However, our audit was not 
directed primarily toward obtaining knowledge of such noncompliance. Accordingly, had we performed 
additional procedures, other matters may have come to our attention regarding the District’s 
noncompliance with the above referenced provisions, insofar as they relate to accounting matters.
UNIFORM FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING
AND REPORTING STANDARDS (UFARS)
FOR MINNESOTA SCHOOL DISTRICTS
AND CHARTER SCHOOLS
12/2025 School Districts 7-1
LEGAL COMPLIANCE AUDIT GUIDE
UNIFORM FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING STANDARDS (UFARS)
FOR MINNESOTA SCHOOL DISTRICTS AND CHARTER SCHOOLS
Introduction
Minnesota law requires that the audits of all school districts, all governmental units formed by joint powers 
agreements entered into by school districts, and all service cooperatives and education districts must include a 
determination of compliance with uniform financial accounting and reporting standards (UFARS). Minn. Stat. 
§§ 6.65; 123B.77, subd. 3. This requirement applies to charter schools under Minn. Stat. § 124E.16, subd. 1(a).
Minn. Stat. § 6.65 states (emphasis added):
The state auditor shall prescribe minimum procedures and the audit scope for auditing the books, 
records, accounts, and affairs of political subdivisions in Minnesota. The minimum scope for audits 
of all political subdivisions must include financial and legal compliance audits. Audits of all school 
districts must include a determination of compliance with uniform financial accounting and reporting 
standards. The state auditor shall promulgate an audit guide for legal compliance audits, in 
consultation with representatives of the state auditor, the attorney general, towns, cities, counties, 
school districts, and private sector public accountants.
Minn. Stat. § 123B.77, subd. 3, states (emphasis added):
By November 30 of the calendar year of the submission of the unaudited financial data, the district 
must provide to the commissioner audited financial data for the preceding fiscal year. The audit must 
be conducted in compliance with generally accepted governmental auditing standards, the federal 
Single Audit Act, and the Minnesota legal compliance guide issued by the Office of the State Auditor. 
An audited financial statement prepared in a form which will allow comparison with and correction 
of material differences in the unaudited financial data shall be submitted to the commissioner and the 
state auditor by December 31. The audited financial statement must also provide a statement of 
assurance pertaining to uniform financial accounting and reporting standards compliance and a copy 
of the management letter submitted to the district by the school district’s auditor.
Uniform Financial Accounting and Reporting Standards (UFARS)
The uniform financial accounting and reporting standards to be used by school districts for automated state 
reporting purposes are described in the UFARS Manual and in School Business Bulletins issued by the 
Minnesota Department of Education. The UFARS Manual and School Business Bulletins provide an account 
code structure and guidance on application of accounting principles. At any point in time, parts of the UFARS 
Manual may have been superseded by legislative, program, and accounting principle changes. The School 
Business Bulletins serve as updates to the UFARS Manual for such changes. It is the auditor’s responsibility 
to stay abreast of current developments.
12/2025 School Districts 7-2
UFARS Compliance
In order to determine compliance with UFARS, the auditor should consider the following items.
Account Coding
Conformance with UFARS includes the classification of revenues and expenditures into appropriate 
UFARS codes. UFARS revenue and expenditure codes consist of 17 digits organized into six dimensions. 
Chapter Ten of the UFARS Manual defines how the six dimensions may be combined into valid 17-digit 
codes for state reporting purposes.
1. Revenue and expenditure account codes that have been developed by school districts for their internal 
use must be linked (crosswalked) to the appropriate 17-digit UFARS codes. In some cases, the internal 
district code bears little resemblance to the UFARS code. The underlying UFARS codes, not the 
district codes, are used for automated reporting to the state.
2. Audit procedures should be developed to ensure that revenues and expenditures have been recorded 
in the proper UFARS codes.
A. Such procedures must include tests of controls as identified in and where required by the American 
Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) Statement of Auditing Standards – Clarity,
Section AU-C 330, Performing Audit Procedures in Response to Assessed Risks and Evaluating 
the Audit Evidence Obtained. The procedures developed should be in response to assessed risks 
identified pursuant to Section AU-C 315, Understanding the Entity and Its Environment and 
Assessing the Risks of Material Misstatement. Sampling may be used to determine the 
reasonableness of recorded UFARS amounts and classifications based on examination of source 
documentation.
.
B. Such audit procedures may include the following:
• Verify appropriate UFARS coding as part of a test of transactions (individual revenue and expenditure 
transactions).
• Test linkage (crosswalk) of internal use account codes to the appropriate 17-digit UFARS codes.
• Review the “UFARS Turnaround Edit Report” for errors. (To access the report, select “Minnesota Funding 
Reports (MFR)” at: https://public.education.mn.gov/MDEAnalytics/DataTopic.jsp?TOPICID=9, then use 
the drop downs.)
• Verify appropriate UFARS coding as part of testing of revenue and expenditure account totals for the 
year.
• Other tests that are considered necessary.
Auditors should use their judgment in determining the nature, timing, and extent of testing necessary to provide 
a statement of assurance pertaining to UFARS compliance.
12/2025 School Districts 7-3
Audit Reporting
The Auditor’s Report on Compliance should indicate that the audit was conducted to determine conformance 
with UFARS standards. Chapter Six of this audit guide includes suggested wording for Auditor’s Reports on 
Compliance.
SCHOOL DISTRICT
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12/2025 School Districts 8-1
LEGAL COMPLIANCE AUDIT GUIDE
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Introduction
This checklist, “School District Miscellaneous Provisions” must be completed by auditors in the course of each 
audit of a school district. It contains provisions that do not fit squarely into the other checklists.
Minn. Stat. 
Section
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Yes No
Workpaper
Reference
12/2025 School Districts 8-2
Part I. School Districts Generally
§ 13D.01 A. Minnesota Open Meeting Law (Applies to governing body of a school district, 
unorganized territory, county, city, town, or other public body; and to any 
committee, subcommittee, board, department, or commission of the public body.)
1. Were all meetings of the governing board and of any committee, 
subcommittee, board, department, or commission of the governing board 
open to the public?
2. If a meeting was closed, did the governing board state on the record the 
specific grounds permitting the meeting to be closed and describe the 
subject to be discussed?
§§ 13D.05,
subd. 1(d),
13D.03
3. Were all closed meetings, except those closed as permitted by the 
attorney-client privilege, electronically recorded at the expense of the 
public body?
§§ 345.38-
.43
B. Unclaimed Property (Applies to any court, public corporation, public authority or 
public officer of this state, or a political subdivision.)
If the political subdivision’s records show unclaimed or uncashed checks or other 
intangible property held for more than three years (or one year for unpaid 
compensation); was the property reported and paid or delivered to the state 
Commissioner of Commerce pursuant to Minn. Stat. §§ 345.41, .43?
§ 465.03 C. Acceptance of Gifts (Applies to any city, county, school district or town.)
Was every acceptance of a grant or devise of real or personal property on terms 
prescribed by the donor made by resolution of the governing board adopted by a 
two-thirds majority of its members and expressing such terms in full?
§ 471.665,
subd. 3
D. Mileage Reimbursement/Automobile allowance (Applies to any county, home rule 
charter or statutory city, town, or school district.) [Note: The City of St. Paul and 
counties having more than 550,000 inhabitants have additional authority. See
Minn. Stat. § 471.665, subd. 2