Act Summary
Chapter 10 — 2025 First Special Session
Subject: K-12 Education Policy and Finance Bill
Bill: H.F. 5
Analysts: Tim Strom, Cristina Parra
Date: July 10, 2025
Source: https://www.house.mn.gov/hrd/as/94/2025-1/as010.pdf
Captured: 2026-07-01

---

Act Summary
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Subject K-12 Education Policy and Finance Bill
Bill H.F. 5
Analyst Tim Strom
Cristina Parra
Date July 10, 2025
Overview
This is the 2025 First Special Session K-12 education finance and policy act. 
Article 1: General Education
This article defines how a student is determined to be in attendance and modifies other 
requirements related to attendance. It also modifies requirements related to the Postsecondary 
Enrollment Options (PSEO) Act, online instruction, and adult basic education (ABE), and allows 
schools to start the school year as early as September 1 for two school years.
The article provides a one-year change in compensatory revenue for school districts, increases 
consolidation transition aid, moves $132 per pupil unit from long-term facilities maintenance 
funding to general education aid for charter schools, and clarifies operating referendum 
revenue renewals and the way operating referendum amounts are handled when a school 
district consolidates.
Section Description – Article 1: General Education
1 Legitimate exceptions. [Compulsory instruction]
Allows a parent to apply to a truant officer or other school official designated by the 
principal to excuse a child from school attendance. Removes other school officials 
from the set of people who may receive such applications.
2 Reporting attendance. [Compulsory instruction]
Defines a student as being in attendance on each day the student receives 
supervision, instruction, or services from school staff during scheduled school hours. 
Maintains a school’s responsibility to comply with reporting requirements for 
purposes of school funding. Requires a principal rather than a clerk to keep a record 
of excused absences.
3 Reports to the state or county.
Requires a principal, within 15 days after the beginning of a term, to report to the 
superintendent a list of the students who were enrolled in school the previous term,
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 2 
Section Description – Article 1: General Education
are not enrolled in the current term, and are eligible for enrollment, unless the 
school has been notified that the student has enrolled in another school. Requires 
the superintendent to make the list available to an authorized representative of a 
county agency whose statutory purpose is to enroll students in school. 
Requires a school district to notify the local welfare agency of any student dropped 
from the school’s roll for having more than 15 consecutive unexcused absences, and 
to contact the family to encourage the student to reenroll. If the local welfare agency 
is unable to contact the student or student’s family, it must inform the school, and 
the school must notify the Department of Education that the student has been 
dropped from the roll and the local welfare agency is unable to contact the student 
or student’s family.
4 Attendance provisions coded elsewhere.
Refers to student attendance provisions coded elsewhere in statute. Provisions relate 
to age of instruction, nonpublic student reporting, transportation, students with 
disabilities, funding to reduce truancy, excused absences, removal from the 
attendance roll, truancy, maltreatment, and criminal penalties.
5 Aid. [Consolidation aid]
Increases the amount of consolidation aid available to consolidating school districts 
from $200 per pupil in the first year of consolidation to $424 per pupil and increases 
the consolidation aid in the second year of consolidation from $100 per pupil to $212 
per pupil. Strikes other obsolete language.
6 Dissolution; referendum revenue.
Clarifies that both voter-approved and board-approved referendum allowances may 
be recalculated or discontinued under the existing reorganization procedures in cases 
of school district dissolution or consolidation.
7 Consolidation; maximum authorized referendum revenues.
Provides that the referendum authority recalculated for a consolidated school district 
upon its consolidation may be renewed by the school board of the newly created 
district under 126C.17, subdivision 9b. Effective retroactively from June 16, 2024, and 
applies to school board renewal resolutions adopted on or after that date.
8 Alternative method. [Consolidation]
Provides that the referendum authority adopted in the consolidation plan for a 
consolidated school district may be renewed by the school board of the newly 
created district under 126C.17, subdivision 9b. Effective retroactively from June 16, 
2024, and applies to school board renewal resolutions adopted on or after that date.
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 3 
Section Description – Article 1: General Education
9 Discontinued referendum revenue.
Clarifies that a consolidation plan may provide for discontinuation of referendum 
revenue that was previously approved by the voters or authorized by the school 
board under its renewal authority.
10 Authorization; notification. [PSEO]
Clarifies that students enrolled in charter schools or Tribal contract schools are 
eligible to participate in PSEO programs. Requires a postsecondary institution to 
notify a pupil’s school if the pupil withdraws from a course or stops attending a 
course that the student is taking for postsecondary credit.
11 Authorization; career or technical education. [PSEO]
Clarifies that students enrolled in charter schools or Tribal contract schools are 
eligible to participate in PSEO programs.
12 Authorization; 9th or 10th grade pupil. [PSEO]
Clarifies that students enrolled in charter schools or Tribal contract schools are 
eligible to participate in PSEO programs.
13 Enrollment priority. [PSEO]
Strikes obsolete language limiting postsecondary institution advertisements and 
recruitment of secondary pupils.
14 Courses according to agreements. [PSEO]
Clarifies that students enrolled in charter schools or Tribal contract schools are 
eligible to participate in PSEO programs.
15 Definitions [for the Online Instruction Act].
Clarifies that the Online Instruction Act is applicable to charter schools and is not 
applicable to nonpublic schools. Provides that state-operated schools are eligible 
supplemental online course providers under the Online Instruction Act.
16 Revenue calculation. [Charter school general education revenue]
Increases general education revenue for a charter school by $132 per adjusted pupil 
unit (APU). The revenue increase under this section is equal to the revenue reduction 
for charter schools under the long-term facility maintenance (LTFM) proposal later in 
the bill and provides no additional money to charter schools. Effective for revenue 
for fiscal year 2026 and later.
17 Compensation revenue pupil units.
Provides, for fiscal year 2026 only, that compensation revenue pupil units for each 
building in a district equals the greater of the building's actual compensation revenue 
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 4 
Section Description – Article 1: General Education
pupil units computed according to paragraphs (a) to (e) for revenue in fiscal year 
2026, or the building's actual compensation revenue pupil units computed according 
to paragraphs (a) to (e) for revenue in fiscal year 2024. 
18 Compensatory education revenue.
Delays the transition to the new compensatory formula enacted in Laws 2023, 
chapter 55, until fiscal year 2027.
19 Statewide compensatory allowance.
Delays the transition to the new compensatory formula enacted in Laws 2023, 
chapter 55, until fiscal year 2027. (The allowance indicated for fiscal year 2027 is the 
amount projected under current law under the February 2025 budget forecast.)
20 Building allocation. [Compensatory revenue] 
Authorizes a school district, upon board approval for fiscal years 2026 and 2027 only, 
to allocate up to 40 percent of the district’s compensatory revenue on a districtwide 
basis (under current law, at least 80 percent of the revenue must remain for use at
each specific school site).
21 Renewal by school board.
Clarifies that a school board may renew an expiring operating referendum 
recalculated or authorized for a consolidated school district. Clarifies the time period 
during which a school board may adopt a resolution to renew an expiring operating 
referendum. Clarifies that the renewal period is a continuous period of time that 
begins July 1 of the second fiscal year prior to the last fiscal year of the expiring 
referendum and extends until June 15 of the fiscal year prior to the last year of the 
expiring referendum. Requires that a district renewing a referendum submit a copy 
of the adopted resolution to the commissioner of education and to the county 
auditor no later than August 15 of the fiscal year in which the referendum expires. 
Effective retroactively from June 16, 2024, and applies to school board renewal 
resolutions adopted on or after that date.
22 Alternative attendance programs. [Transfers to ALCs]
Requires 100 percent (instead of an amount determined by the resident district 
between 90 percent and 100 percent) of the designated portion of general education 
revenue to be transferred from the resident school district to the Area Learning 
Center (ALC). Effective for revenue for fiscal year 2026 and later.
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 5 
Section Description – Article 1: General Education
23 Unemployment insurance report.
Requires that the annual unemployment insurance report prepared by the 
Minnesota Department of Education (MDE) separately identify costs attributable to 
special education paraprofessionals. Effective for reports filed after July 1, 2025.
24 Career and technical program expansion; aeronautics pilot program.
Clarifies that equipment purchases made by the Little Falls School District after 
receiving a legislative grant of $450,000 for an aeronautics and commercial over-theroad career and technical education program are valid and reimbursable by the grant 
regardless of the official date of grant approval from MDE. Requires the district to 
show how the early expenditures for the program were successful in providing the 
aeronautics and commercial over-the-road technical program in a more timely 
manner to the school district's participating high school students. Effective 
retroactively from May 24, 2023.
25 Laws 2023, chapter 55 effective date.
Delays the repeal of various statutory provisions governing the compensatory aid 
program to conform with the alternative fiscal year 2026 aid calculation under an 
earlier section of this article.
26 School start date for the 2026-2027 and 2027-2028 school years only.
Allows a district to begin the school year on September 1 or later for the 2026-2027 
and 2027-2028 school years only. Effective immediately.
27 Compensatory Revenue Task Force.
Creates a Compensatory Revenue Task Force consisting of 14 members and charges 
the task force with examining Minnesota’s compensatory revenue program and 
reporting recommendations to the legislature. Requires an initial report by February 
25, 2026, and a final report by October 15, 2026.
28 Appropriations.
Appropriates money for general education programs. See Fiscal worksheets at 
https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
29 Revisor instruction.
Directs the revisor to explicitly include Tribal contract school students as students 
eligible for PSEO programming, and include charter and Tribal contract schools in 
statute granting eligibility for concurrent enrollment program aid. 
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 6 
Article 2: Education Excellence
This article modifies provisions relating to instruction on specific subjects, including instruction 
on violence prevention, substance use, and healthy aging; paraprofessional requirements; the 
achievement and integration program; innovative education programs; literacy aid; and makes 
other changes. 
Section Description – Article 2: Education Excellence
1 Application and review process; funding priority. [Advanced Placement and 
International Baccalaureate programs]
Allows the commissioner to give priority for AP-IB grants to charter schools and 
school districts that have adopted a policy to automatically enroll eligible students in 
preadvanced placement, advanced placement, or international baccalaureate 
programs.
2 Healthy aging and dementia education.
Encourages school districts and charter schools to provide instruction on healthy 
aging and dementia to students in grades 6 through 12 that is aligned with applicable 
health standards and integrated into existing curriculum or the general school 
environment. 
3 Model program. [Education on cannabis use and substance use]
Requires the commissioner-identified model programs on cannabis use and 
substance use to also include overdose recognition, prevention, and response. 
Effective immediately.
4 Violence prevention curriculum.
Encourages districts to include instruction on reducing physical abuse in a violence 
prevention curriculum. Effective immediately.
5 State growth measures; other state measures. [Student academic achievement and 
growth]
Requires the commissioner to report language development outcomes of the target 
language of instruction other than English for all students in dual immersion 
programs or in programs in which the objective is improving or maintaining the 
students’ native language.
6 Local policy components. [School student bullying policy]
Allows a parent or guardian to designate another individual to be notified of 
prohibited conduct under the school student bullying policy.
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 7 
Section Description – Article 2: Education Excellence
7 State model policy. [School student bullying policy]
Clarifies that the department has authority to assess and evaluate, not investigate, 
noncompliance with the school student bullying requirements.
8 Qualifications [Paraprofessionals].
Establishes the competency criteria for a Minnesota special education
paraprofessional to meet federal personnel qualifications starting in the 2025-2026 
school year. Allows a school, upon request from a paraprofessional employed by the 
school, to provide administrative assistance to the paraprofessional when completing 
the competencies. Effective immediately.
9 Student representation. [Boards of independent school districts]
Encourages a school board to adopt a process to include student representation to 
advise the school board.
10 Disposing of surplus books.
Allows a school district to dispose of surplus schoolbooks by donating them to a 
family of a student residing in the district or a charitable organization.
11 Experiential and applied learning opportunities for students.
Clarifies that the commissioner of education is not authorized to approve or deny a 
school board-adopted experiential and applied learning program.
12 Board approval process. [P-TECH schools]
Allows a school board to adopt a P-TECH program without commissioner approval.
13 Grant process. [P-TECH schools]
Clarifies that the commissioner is not authorized to approve or deny a locally 
adopted P-TECH plan.
14 Full-service community schools.
Modifies the full-service community schools program requirements, including the 
types of community organizations eligible to partner with full-service community 
schools. Establishes statutory criteria for the commissioner to prioritize grant awards. 
Modifies the composition of the school leadership team.
15 Minnesota math corps program.
Requires Minnesota math corps to use evidence-based instructional support to 
evaluate and accelerate student learning on foundational mathematics skills. Defines 
“evidence-based.”
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 8 
Section Description – Article 2: Education Excellence
16 Public engagement; progress report and budget process. [Achievement and 
Integration]
Requires that a school board annually submit its most recent achievement and 
integration progress report to the commissioner. 
17 Timeline and implementation. [Achievement and Integration]
Strikes obsolete language. 
18 Initial achievement and integration revenue. [Achievement and Integration]
Increases the amount of each district’s initial achievement and integration revenue 
that MDE may retain for administration of the program. The administrative amount 
increases from 0.3 percent to 1.3 percent of initial achievement and integration 
revenue for the second prior fiscal year. Effective for revenue in fiscal year 2026 and 
later.
19 Commissioner authority to withhold revenue. [Achievement and Integration]
Amends the deadline for the commissioner to review district achievement and 
integration results from August 1 to January 1. Clarifies that the commissioner directs 
districts to use up to 20 percent of their integration revenue to implement the 
improvement plan until the district’s goals are met. 
20 Literacy aid.
Renames "literacy incentive aid" as "literacy aid".
21 Literacy aid uses.
Beginning in fiscal year 2026, requires that literacy aid be used to meet the 
requirements and goals adopted in the district’s local literacy plan. Effective for 
revenue in fiscal year 2026 and later.
22 Full-service community schools. 
Extends the fiscal year 2024/2025 appropriations for full-service community schools 
from June 30, 2025, to June 30, 2027. Effective immediately.
23 Innovation service-learning grants. 
Extends the availability of the fiscal year 2024 appropriation for innovation servicelearning grants until June 30, 2026. Effective immediately. 
24 Appropriations. 
Appropriates money for educational excellence programs. See Fiscal worksheets at 
https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 9 
Section Description – Article 2: Education Excellence
25 Revisor instruction.
Directs the revisor to codify a new chapter of statutes relating to education 
innovation, and codifies innovation zone session law in new chapter.
26 Repealer.
Repeals section 123B.935, subdivision 2 (active transportation safety training 
deadlines).
Article 3: Teachers
This article transfers programs from the Professional Educators Licensing and Standards Board 
(PELSB) to the Department of Education (MDE); modifies the short-call substitute teacher 
program, the teacher mentoring program, and the student support personnel aid amounts and 
uses; and makes other changes.
Section Description – Article 3: Teachers
1 Reporting. [Teachers of color and American Indian teachers]
Requires MDE, instead of PELSB, to report on programs receiving state funds that 
have the purpose of increasing the racial and ethnic diversity of the teacher 
workforce.
2 Requirements for board approval. [Teacher preparation programs]
Removes a requirement that PELSB annually report certain performance of teacher 
candidates to the legislature. Strikes other obsolete language.
3 Reading strategies. [Teacher preparation programs]
Completes a technical correction under Laws 2024, chapter 85, section 18, related to 
teacher testing requirements that were substantively modified under Laws 2023, 
chapter 55, article 5, sections 39 and 40.
4 Short-call emergency substitute teacher program.
Makes permanent a program that allows qualifying education support personnel or 
paraprofessionals to obtain a short-call substitute teacher license. Modifies 
requirements to substitute teacher rate of pay, and how long a short-call substitute 
teacher under the program may cover a particular assignment. Effective immediately.
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 10
Section Description – Article 3: Teachers
5 Expiration. [Come teach in Minnesota hiring bonuses]
Expires the Come Teach in Minnesota Hiring Bonus program on June 30, 2029, and 
cancels any remaining balance in the program account to the general fund on that 
date.
6 Educator Tuition Assistance Program.
Renames the Collaborative and Urban Greater Minnesota Educators of Color Grant 
Program as the Educator Tuition Assistance Program (ETAP). Transfers responsibility 
for awarding grants from PELSB to MDE. Modifies the grant award criteria, the grant 
award uses, the process for establishing the amount of direct financial assistance to 
candidates, and the grant award timeline. Provides for the transfer of staff positions 
from PELSB to MDE. Makes other conforming changes.
7 Grants. [Teacher mentorship]
Transfers responsibility for administering the teacher mentorship grant program 
from PELSB to MDE. Expands individual grant eligibility to additional entities, 
including nonprofit organizations or professional organizations.
8 Criteria for selection [Teacher mentorship grants].
Removes the requirement that the commissioner give priority to grant applications 
from programs specifically serving Tier 2 or Tier 3 teachers. Makes other conforming 
changes.
9 Program implementation [Teacher mentorship grants].
Makes conforming changes related to the transfer of the grant program from PELSB 
to MDE.
10 Grant program administration [Teacher mentorship grants].
Makes conforming changes related to the transfer of the grant program from PELSB 
to MDE.
11 Report [Teacher mentorship grants].
Reduces the frequency of the report on teacher mentorship grants from an annual 
report to a biennial report. Makes other conforming changes.
12 Positions transferred [Teacher mentorship grants].
Provides for the transfer of staff positions from PELSB to MDE related to the transfer 
of the grant program.
13 Student support personnel aid.
Modifies student support personnel aid (SSPA). Sets the per pupil allowance at 
$30.05 for fiscal years 2026 and 2027 and $34.32 per pupil for each year thereafter 
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 11
Section Description – Article 3: Teachers
(current law increased the per pupil allowance from $17.08 in fiscal year 2025 to 
$48.73 for fiscal year 2026 and later). Sets the cooperative student support 
allowance at $1.60 for fiscal year 2026 and thereafter. Expands the uses of the aid to 
include up to $5,000 per year for employee training, job-embedded coaching, and for 
qualifying travel expenses among school buildings for support staff.
Authorizes a school district with declining enrollment to expend funds on retaining 
student support personnel to maintain an existing position that would otherwise be 
eliminated due to budgetary concerns.
14 Transfer of grant administration and staff.
Provides for transfer of contracts, obligations, unexpended funds, and staff from 
PELSB to MDE relating to the transfer of the ETAP grants and teacher mentorship 
grants. Provides a framework for future transfer of facilities, services, or operations 
related to the transferred grant programs.
15 Appropriations; MDE.
Appropriates money for teacher programs administered by MDE. See Fiscal
worksheets at https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
16 Appropriations; PELSB.
Appropriates money for teacher programs administered by PELSB. See Fiscal
worksheets at https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
17 Revisor instruction.
Directs the revisor to change the term “pipeline” to “pathway” wherever it appears 
in Minnesota Statutes, section 122A.77 (special education teacher program). Directs 
the revisor of statutes to codify the Agricultural Educators grant program under 
chapter 122A.
Article 4: Read Act
This article establishes the legislative intent of the Read Act; modifies definitions; clarifies 
screening and intervention requirements; modifies local literacy plan requirements; modifies 
licensure requirements related to training on teaching foundational reading skills; and makes 
other changes.
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 12
Section Description – Article 4: Read Act
1 Title; the Read Act.
Adds subdivision establishing legislative intent of the Read Act.
2 Certified trained facilitator. [Definitions]
Clarifies that a “certified trained facilitator” may be employed by a service 
cooperative rather than a literacy network.
3 Oral language. [Definitions]
Modifies definition of “oral language.”
4 Structured literacy. [Definitions]
Provides that structured literacy is consistent with the science of reading.
5 Literacy goal. [Read Act goal and interventions]
Clarifies that the benchmarks determine grade level expectations and are more 
appropriate for goal setting. Encourages districts to include a process for engaging 
families and communities as part of a multi-tiered systems of support (MTSS) 
framework.
6 Identification; report. [Read Act goal and interventions]
Includes students enrolled in dual language immersion programs in the universal 
kindergarten through grade 3 screening for mastery of foundational reading skills. 
Clarifies when oral reading fluency screeners may be used to assess reading 
difficulties, including characteristics of dyslexia. Establishes separate screening 
requirements for students enrolled in dual language immersion programs.
7 Parent notification and involvement. [Read Act goal and interventions]
Requires the district to measure a student's reading proficiency in the dual language 
immersion program's partner language, if a screener is available. Requires the 
notification to parents of students enrolled in dual language immersion programs to 
follow the district's language access plan and to include information about students' 
reading proficiency, supports provided, and strategies to use at home.
8 Intervention. [Read Act goal and interventions]
Clarifies that reading interventions must be aligned and targeted to accelerate 
student growth. Extends the deadline for implementing evidence-based literacy 
interventions from the 2025-2026 school year to the 2026-2027 school year. 
Requires paraprofessionals who are providing a foundational literacy intervention to 
be monitored by a teacher who has completed one of the approved professional 
development trainings. Requires a paraprofessional or other unlicensed person to
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 13
Section Description – Article 4: Read Act
complete training under the Read Act offered at no cost through the regional literacy 
networks.
9 Staff development. [Read Act goal and interventions]
Strikes reference to “oral” in reference to academic language development.
10 Local literacy plan. [Read Act goal and interventions]
Requires curricula to be evidence-based, not approved. Amends the report to the 
legislature summarizing local literacy plans to include the number of teachers or 
other staff required to complete the training under section 120B.123, subdivision 5 
that have received other training or education that meets the requirements of the 
training approved by the Department of Education; and how the district used its 
literacy aid. Requires additional reporting for a district with a dual language 
immersion program beginning on December 31, 2025.
11 Dual language immersion advisory committee. [Read Act goal and interventions]
Requires the Department of Education to establish an advisory committee to advise 
the department on the unique needs of dual language immersion programs’ 
implementation of the Read Act.
12 Approved screeners. [Read Act implementation]
Broadens requirement relating to persons that use approved screeners to include all 
“external partners offering literacy supports in schools.”
13 Professional development. [Read Act implementation]
(a) Clarifies that special education teachers who are responsible for literacy 
instruction are required to take the required training by July 1, 2026.
(b) Requires teachers who provide instruction to students in dual language 
immersion programs to receive approved training by July 1, 2027.
(c) Expands lists of persons and organizations that can provide required professional 
development to teachers.
(d) Beginning July 1, 2027, requires an educator required to receive training under 
this section, who is new to the state of Minnesota or is newly licensed who did not 
receive instruction in the teaching of foundational reading skills based on structured 
literacy, to complete one of the approved training programs. The required training 
must be offered through the regional literacy network and facilitated by a local 
certified trained facilitator. Directs the department to review district literacy lead 
waiver requests and grant waivers to educators new to the state who have 
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 14
Section Description – Article 4: Read Act
completed the professional development requirements consistent with this 
subdivision.
(e) Extends the hours of instruction reduction for elementary students to the 2025-
2026 school year. Allows the hours of instruction for secondary students to be 
reduced by 5 ½ hours for the 2025-2026 school year. Effective immediately.
14 Teacher licensure; renewal. [Read Act implementation]
Establishes training requirements linked to licensure for Tier 1 and Tier 2 teachers 
holding particular field licenses, starting July 1, 2027. A teacher that does not 
complete the training requirements for reasons of insubordination or willful refusal 
to comply is subject to discipline from their employing district or charter school.
15 Department of Education. [Read Act implementation]
Allows the department to identify additional literacy intervention models after the 
partnership with CAREI has ended.
16 Resources. [Read Act implementation partnership]
Requires the department to post on its website the rubric used to evaluate 
curriculum. Effective immediately.
17 Review. [Read Act implementation partnership]
Requires the review process for adding to the list of approved curricula to use the 
rubric used to approve curriculum with the addition of culturally responsive criteria. 
Requires alternative curriculum and intervention programs for those who cannot 
access sound-based approaches to be reviewed on the same cycle as traditional 
programs.
18 Volunteer and paraprofessional training. [Read Act implementation partnership]
Strikes references to CAREI and Tier 2 as a descriptor for interventions.
19 Ongoing review of literacy materials. [Read Act implementation partnership]
Requires the rubrics for ongoing reviews of curriculum and intervention materials to 
be posted on the department website.
20 Comprehensive review of literacy materials. [Read Act implementation 
partnership]
Requires the rubrics for future reviews of curriculum and intervention materials to be 
posted on the department website.
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 15
Section Description – Article 4: Read Act
21 Term of license and renewal. [Tier 1 license]
Amends the Tier 1 licensure statute to conform to the Read Act teacher licensure 
requirements in this article.
22 Term of license and renewal. [Tier 2 license]
Amends the Tier 2 licensure statute to conform to the Read Act teacher licensure 
requirements in this article.
23 Coursework. [Tier 3 license]
Amends the Tier 3 licensure statute to conform to the Read Act teacher licensure 
requirements in this article.
24 Minnesota reading corps program.
Requires reading corps to use a department-approved screener.
25 CAREI. [2024/25 appropriation]
Cancels the portion of a Laws 2023 appropriation for CAREI back to the general fund 
on June 29, 2025. Effective immediately.
26 Read Act literacy aid.
Cancels the fiscal year 2024 appropriation for Read Act administration to the general 
fund on June 29, 2025. Effective immediately.
27 Administrative process. [for distribution of Read Act funding under Laws 2024]
Requires a district to distribute Read Act funding in the form of stipends to each 
teacher eligible for compensation if the district has not otherwise entered into a 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the exclusive representative of teachers 
by August 1, 2025. Effective immediately.
28 Regional literacy network paraprofessional and volunteer training.
Clarifies that the regional literacy networks may use the fiscal year 2025 
appropriation to develop and administer literacy training. Effective immediately.
29 Appropriation cancellation; CAREI paraprofessional and volunteer training.
Cancels a portion of a Laws 2024 appropriation for CAREI to develop training for 
paraprofessional and volunteer training back to the general fund on June 30, 2025.
Effective immediately.
30 Appropriations.
Appropriates money for the Read Act. See Fiscal worksheets at 
https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 16
Article 5: Charter Schools
This article modifies requirements related to charter school procurement policies, market need 
and demand studies, boards of directors, and authorizers, and makes other changes.
Section Description – Article 5: Charter Schools
1 Definitions. [Certain gifts by lobbyists and principals prohibited]
Adds a member of a charter school board, charter school director or chief 
administrator to the definition of “official” for purposes of the public official gift ban.
2 Definitions. [Charter schools; generally]
Provides a definition of “competitive procurement process” relating to procurement 
provisions modified later in this article. Clarifies that a charter school “market need 
and demand study” must include information relating to all of the proposed grades, 
sites, and programs for the school or additional school site.
3 Certain federal, state, and local requirements.
Clarifies that a charter school must comply with all requirements under chapter 
120B, not only those relating to state standards and assessments.
4 Statement of economic interest; gift ban.
Makes charter school board members and persons employed as charter school 
directors or chief administrators subject to the gift bans under current state law.
5 Roles, responsibilities, and requirements of authorizers.
Requires a charter school authorizer to include information in its annual report 
regarding the commissioner’s performance review of the authorizer. Provides that an 
authorizer must participate in annual department-approved training.
6 Merger. [Forming a school]
Requires that the merged school and its authorizer must execute a new charter 
contract by June 1 preceding the July 1 effective date of the merger. Effective for 
mergers after July 1, 2025.
7 Change in location. [Forming a school]
Requires a charter school to apply to its authorizer to change the location of the 
school and requires certain documentation for the authorizer’s review and approval. 
Effective for applications submitted on or after July 1, 2025.
8 Ongoing board of directors. [Board of directors]
Strikes language regarding the timing of charter school board elections that is 
recodified in a later section of this article.
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 17
Section Description – Article 5: Charter Schools
9 Membership criteria. [Board of directors]
Prohibits an individual who has violated the law against serving on more than one 
charter school board at the same time from continuing to serve as a board member 
and makes them ineligible to be elected or appointed to a charter school board for 
24 months. Provides that a charter school board member who is compensated for 
serving on the board must not receive more compensation than a school board 
member in the district in which the charter school is located.
10 Board elections. [Board of directors]
Recodifies language regarding the timing of charter school board elections that was 
stricken in a previous section of this article. Requires charter school board members 
to file a written oath of office with the charter school’s authorizer.
11 Duties. [Board of directors]
Requires a charter school board of directors to establish a finance committee and 
establishes statutory duties for the committee. Requires a charter school that is 
under corrective actions for financial reasons to include the school’s authorizer in 
meetings of its finance committee, and, upon request of the authorizer, hire a 
financial expert.
12 Causes for nonrenewal or termination of a charter school contract.
Requires that a hearing before a charter school’s authorizer regarding nonrenewal or 
termination of the charter school’s contract be live-streamed. (Under current law, 
the hearing must be recorded by audio, video, or a court reporter.)
13 Affiliated nonprofit building corporation.
Prohibits a contractor or certain other interested parties from serving on the board 
of a charter school’s affiliated building corporation (ABC). Provides that a charter 
school employee or immediate family member of the employee may serve on the 
ABC board if the employee has no conflict of interest.
14 Audit report.
Requires that a charter school annually submit all supplemental information included 
in its audit to the commissioner and to its authorizer. The supplemental information 
must include any management agreement with a charter management organization 
(CMO) or educational management organization (EMO).
15 Authorizer performance evaluation report.
Requires a charter school to publish on its website the formal written performance 
evaluation from its authorizer and disseminate the evaluation to enrolled families.
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 18
Section Description – Article 5: Charter Schools
16 Dissemination of information.
Requires an authorizer to publish on its website information about charter contracts, 
school performance reviews, notices to terminate or not renew, and certain other 
notices regarding charter schools in its portfolio. Requires a charter school to post a 
link from its website to this information on the authorizer’s website, and upon 
request of the authorizer, distribute certain information from the authorizer to 
charter school employees and families. Requires an authorizer to publish on its 
website certain financial statements related to its authorizing activities.
17 Required policy components. [Use of state money]
Clarifies charter school procurement procedures, including requirements for 
procurement by sealed bids or proposals.
18 Competitive procurement. [Use of state money]
Defines the requirements for procurement by sealed bids or procurement by 
proposals.
19 Appropriations.
Appropriates money for charter school building lease aid. See Fiscal worksheets at 
https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
20 Revisor instruction.
Directs the revisor to renumber subdivision on public accounting and reporting CMO 
and EMO agreements as new statute.
Article 6: American Indian Education
This article modifies requirements related to American Indian mascots, scholarship programs, 
graduation activities and other ceremonies, and Tribal school eligibility for various grant 
programs.
Section Description – Article 6: American Indian Education
1 Prohibition on mascots. [Report]
Requires the annual report on American Indian mascots to also be submitted to the 
Education Finance Committees of the legislature (currently the reports are sent to 
the Education Policy Committees). Effective for reports submitted after June 30, 
2025.
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 19
Section Description – Article 6: American Indian Education
2 Exemption. [American Indian Mascots]
Authorizes a school district to retain an American Indian mascot and American Indian 
symbols upon approval of the geographically closest American Indian Tribe and the 
school district’s American Indian Parent Advisory Committee, as applicable. Effective 
immediately.
3 Eligible programming. [Minnesota Indian Teacher Training Program]
Clarifies that the Minnesota Indian Teacher Training Program (MITTP) scholarships 
are available to eligible students progressing toward educational goals in an early 
education through grade 12 educational setting (and not available for students 
progressing toward a career in a higher education setting). 
4 Graduation ceremonies; Tribal regalia and objects of cultural significance; 
drumming and culturally appropriate activities. 
Encourages a school district or charter school, if requested by the school's American 
Indian Parent Advisory Committee, to work with the committee on incorporating 
American Indian drumming and other culturally appropriate activities during 
graduation activities, celebrations, or ceremonies. Effective immediately. 
5 Eligibility for other grants. [Tribal contract schools]
Makes a Tribal contract school eligible to apply for education grants otherwise 
available to school district applicants.
6 Appropriations.
Appropriates money for American Indian education aid programs. See Fiscal 
worksheets at https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
Article 7: Special Education
This article modifies special education funding for special education pupil transportation 
services, reduces state charter school special education payments as part of the tuition billing 
process, creates a Blue Ribbon Commission to study special education, and creates a contingent 
reduction in the special education cross subsidy aid reimbursement rate if insufficient savings 
are realized from the recommendations of the Blue Ribbon Commission.
Other provisions establish a developmental delay work group, modify school district language 
access plan requirements, and establish a state process for filing and resolving a complaint over 
a violation of the federal Individuals with Disabilities Act (IDEA).
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 20
Section Description – Article 7: Special Education
1 Language access plan required.
Provides that the school board-adopted language access plan must also specify the 
district’s process and procedures to render effective language assistance to students 
and adults who require additional assistance due to a disability.
2 Plan requirements. [Language access plan]
Clarifies that the language access plan should address district procedures for 
communication relating to special education determinations and placements, ensure 
meaningful participation in the individualized education program (IEP) process by 
families where the family speaks a language other than English or has a disability 
themselves, and provide a process to appeal the accommodations of the access plan 
if needs are not met.
3 Definitions. [Pupil transportation definitions]
Reformats the statutory definition of special education pupil transportation without 
making any substantive changes to the eligible pupil transportation services.
4 Special education aid. [Charter schools]
Reduces the state-paid tuition reimbursement of unfunded charter school special 
education costs from ten percent to six percent of the charter school’s unreimbursed 
costs (80 percent of the charter school’s unreimbursed special education costs 
continue to be billed to each student’s resident school district).
5 State complaint process.
Establishes a process to file a complaint over a violation of the federal IDEA.
Subd. 1. Filing a state complaint. Allows an organization or individual to file a 
complaint with the Department of Education, Office of General Counsel, Dispute 
Resolution. Establishes requirements for a complaint.
Subd. 2. Remedies. Requires the department to address the failure to provide 
appropriate services and appropriate future provision of services for all children 
with disabilities when resolving a complaint and finding a failure to provide 
appropriate services.
Subd. 3. Time limit and procedures. Establishes investigation and other 
procedures for resolving a complaint.
Subd. 4. Complaints and due process hearings. Requires the department to set 
aside an issue or complaint that is also the subject of a due process hearing. 
Allows an organization or individual to file a complaint alleging a failure to 
implement a due process hearing decision.
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 21
Section Description – Article 7: Special Education
6 Special education initial aid.
Lowers the initial reimbursement of special education pupil transportation aid 
expenditures from 100 percent of eligible costs to 95 percent of eligible costs for 
fiscal year 2026 and 90 percent of the eligible costs for fiscal years 2027 and later. 
Keeps the reimbursement cost for the transportation of homeless and highly mobile 
students at 100 percent of eligible costs.
7 Blue ribbon commission on special education.
Establishes a Blue Ribbon Commission on Special Education consisting of 18 
members. Requires the commissioner of education to serve as chair of the 
commission, convene the first meeting no later than October 15, 2025, and provide 
administrative support to the commission. Compensates members of the commission 
under Minnesota Statutes, section 15.0575, subdivision 3. Requires public and 
stakeholder engagement. Requires the commissioner to seek input from special 
education experts. Establishes specific duties for the commission and requires the 
commission to adopt its action plan by October 1, 2026.
8 Direction to commissioner of management and budget; contingent reduction in 
special education appropriations.
When preparing the forecast for state revenues and expenditures under Minnesota 
Statutes, section 16A.103, requires the commissioner of management and budget to 
assume a $250,000,000 reduction in the appropriations for special education aid for 
the biennium beginning July 1, 2027, and for each subsequent biennium, until the 
end of the legislative session that enacts a budget for the Department of Education 
for the biennium beginning July 1, 2027.
Upon enactment of a budget for the Department of Education for the biennium 
beginning July 1, 2027, requires the legislature to identify enacted provisions that 
were recommended by or based on the recommendation of the Blue Ribbon 
Commission on Special Education.
If the net savings attributable to the provisions of the commission action plan are less 
than $250,000,000 for the biennium beginning July 1, 2027, and for each subsequent 
biennium, the commissioner of education must reduce the special education cross 
subsidy aid factor under Minnesota Statutes, section 125A.76, subdivision 2e, 
paragraph (b), as necessary until the reductions and the action plan achieve
$250,000,000 of biennial savings. 
9 Developmental delay age limit working group.
Requires the Department of Education to establish a working group on the age limit 
for children receiving special education services for developmental delay. Requires 
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 22
Section Description – Article 7: Special Education
the commissioner to consult with interested organizations before appointing
members to the working group.
Requires the working group to meet on a regular basis, review current law limiting 
the eligibility of children seven years old or older from receiving intervention services 
for developmental delay, and assess the impact of extending eligibility to children 
under age nine. The working group must report its findings and recommendations to 
the legislative committees with jurisdiction over kindergarten through grade 12 
education by February 1, 2026.
10 Seclusion working group.
Establishes a working group to evaluate the use of seclusion as an emergency 
procedure and not as discipline. The working group consists of four legislators and 
eight members appointed jointly by the senate majority leader, speaker of the house, 
and speaker emerita of the house to represent specified groups. Requires the 
working group to report on its findings and recommendations by January 30, 2026.
11 Appropriations; Department of Education.
Appropriates money for special education aid programs and the work groups. See 
Fiscal worksheets at https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
12 Appropriations; Legislative Coordinating Commission.
Appropriates money for the seclusion working group. See Fiscal worksheets at 
https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
Article 8: Facilities, Health, and Safety
This article modifies various facilities, health, and safety programs, including provisions relating 
to epinephrine and opiate antagonists; cardiac emergency response; capital project referendum 
authority and procedures; roof repair and replacement in the long-term facilities maintenance 
programs; review and comment requirements; and cooperative ice arena levy authority.
Section Description – Article 8: Facilities, Health, and Safety
1 Exclusions. [Administration of drugs and medicine]
Replaces reference to epinephrine auto-injectors with more generic reference to 
epinephrine delivery system.
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 23
Section Description – Article 8: Facilities, Health, and Safety
2 Possession and use of epinephrine delivery systems; model policy.
Replaces “epinephrine auto-injector” with “epinephrine delivery system” which 
expands how epinephrine can be administered.
3 Life-threatening allergies in schools; stock supply of epinephrine delivery systems.
Replaces reference to epinephrine auto-injectors with more generic reference to 
epinephrine delivery system. Requires the commissioner of health to provide a 
district or school with a standing order for distribution of epinephrine delivery 
systems.
4 Opiate antagonists.
Allows a district or charter school to allow a high school student to possess and 
administer an opiate antagonist to another high school student.
5 Cardiac emergency response plan.
Defines “cardiac emergency response plan”. Requires a school district or charter 
school to develop a cardiac emergency response plan consistent with the model plan 
developed by the commissioner beginning in the 2026-2027 school year. Establishes 
minimum requirements for the plan.
6 Resolution. [Consolidation]
Provides that capital project referendum authority for a school district may continue 
if that district consolidates with another district before the current authority expires, 
unless the consolidation plan provides otherwise. Makes other changes to conform 
with the operating referendum changes in an earlier article of the bill.
7 Supporting statement. [Consolidation]
Requires that the county auditor’s supporting statement regarding school district 
consolidation include information about the disposition of capital project referendum 
revenue of the component districts. 
8 Consolidation; capital project referendum revenue.
Provides a process for recalculating and establishing the remaining term of the 
capital project referendum authority for the consolidated school district.
9 Long-term facilities maintenance revenue.
Authorizes a school district to include roof repair and replacement costs totaling 
$100,000 or more per site in the district’s annual long-term facilities maintenance 
(LTFM) revenue authority. (For most districts, this specific authority would increase 
revenues potentially available for roof repair and replacement and free up money 
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 24
Section Description – Article 8: Facilities, Health, and Safety
currently being spent for that purpose for reallocation toward other deferred 
maintenance projects.) Effective for fiscal year 2027 and later.
10 Facilities plans. [Long-term facilities maintenance revenue]
Beginning in fiscal year 2027, requires each district to include information about roof 
repair and replacement in its ten-year LTFM facility plan. 
11 Long-term facilities maintenance equalized levy.
Increases the LTFM equalizing factor beginning in fiscal year 2027 to offset projected 
increases in statewide LTFM levies with additional equalization aid. 
12 Allowed uses for long-term facilities maintenance revenue.
Clarifies that repair and replacement of roofs is an allowable use of LTFM revenue.
Effective for revenue for fiscal year 2026 and later.
13 Review and comment. [Capital expenditures]
Removes the current-law review and comment exemption for projects funded only 
with proceeds from an additional capital expenditure levy (building lease levy). 
Effective for review and comments submitted on or after July 1, 2025. 
14 Internet access for students.
Strikes language to conform with the repeal of the equity in telecommunications 
access aid program.
15 To lease building or land. [Capital levies]
Provides that projects funded by the building lease levy may be subject to review and 
comment if the project exceeds certain expenditure thresholds. Requires the 
commissioner to annually prescribe criteria for approval of lease levy applications. 
Makes other clarifying and technical changes. Effective for review and comments 
submitted on or after July 1, 2025.
16 Definitions. [Capital levies]
Provides definitions applicable to the building lease levy program. Effective for 
review and comments submitted on or after July 1, 2025. 
17 Ice arena levy.
Authorizes two or more school districts to apportion the levy for the costs of 
cooperative operation of an ice arena among cooperating districts. Requires each 
cooperating district to report information about the apportionment to the 
commissioner. Effective for taxes payable in 2026 and later.
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 25
Section Description – Article 8: Facilities, Health, and Safety
18 Appropriations.
Appropriates money for facilities, health, and safety programs. See Fiscal worksheets 
at https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
19 Repealer.
Repeals LTFM revenue authority for charter schools (in an earlier section in the bill, 
the same aid amount is paid to the charter school as additional general education 
aid). Repeals the equity in telecommunications access aid program after fiscal year 
2027.
Article 9: Nutrition and Libraries
Expands eligible uses for nutrition funds and lowers the extra school lunch aid amounts by 6.25
cents per meal beginning in fiscal year 2028. Requires schools to allow students to purchase a 
second breakfast and a second lunch at full cost. Reduces school library aid for fiscal year 2026 
and later.
Section Description – Article 9: Nutrition and Libraries
1 School lunch aid amounts. [Additional state contribution]
Lowers the additional state funding for school lunch (above the amount established 
by federal rule for free lunch) from 12.5 cents to 6.25 cents per meal served 
beginning in fiscal year 2028.
2 Federal food programs; board of directors; salaries.
Establishes statutory criteria for evaluating applications from nonprofit organizations 
applying for sponsorship as a multisite sponsoring organization under the federal 
child and adult care food program and federal summer food service program. 
Requires certain financial staffing and board governance. Requires the commissioner 
to establish salary guidelines and limits the amount of salary costs that may be 
charged to the nonprofit food service fund.
3 School food service fund.
Clarifies the administrative costs that may be charged to a school district’s food 
service fund. States that Minnesota should allow schools to expend food service 
funds on nutritional programs, lunchroom space, and kitchen space to the extent 
allowed by federal law.
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 26
Section Description – Article 9: Nutrition and Libraries
4 Second lunch.
Requires a school to allow a student to purchase a second lunch if the student has 
already selected a reimbursable lunch. 
5 Second breakfast.
Requires a school to allow a student to purchase a second breakfast if the student 
has already selected a reimbursable breakfast. 
6 Summer Electronic Benefit Transfer Program replacement aid.
Redirects state funds available to support data collection of students participating in 
the summer electronic benefit (S-EBT) from the department to the schools providing 
S-EBT data.
7 Summer food service program locations.
Modifies reference to applicable federal regulation.
8 School library aid.
Reduces per pupil school library aid to $10.27 for fiscal years 2026 and 2027 and to 
$9.12 for fiscal year 2028 and later. Reduces minimum amounts from $40,000 for a 
school district and $20,000 for a charter school, to $20,000 for a school district and 
$10,000 for a charter school beginning in fiscal year 2026. Clarifies that only 
independent and special school districts are eligible to receive school library aid, not 
including common school districts or “nonoperating” school districts. Strikes other 
obsolete language.
9 State school librarian.
Limits the funding of the state school librarian from school library aid to fiscal year 
2026 and 2027 only. For fiscal year 2028 and later, the position will be funded out of 
MDE’s agency appropriation.
10 Uses of school library aid.
Removes electronic, computer, and audiovisual equipment; and information 
technology infrastructure and digital tools from the list of eligible uses of school 
library aid. Effective for fiscal year 2026 and later.
11 Appropriations.
Appropriates money school nutrition and library programs. See Fiscal worksheets at 
https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 27
Article 10: Early Childhood Education
This article clarifies the payment and administration of various early education aids 
administered by the Department of Children, Youth, and Families, and modifies the 
implementation schedule for the kindergarten entry assessment.
Section Description – Article 10: Early Childhood Education
1 Implementation. [Kindergarten entry assessment]
Delays district and charter school compliance with statutory requirements until the 
2026-2027 school year.
2 Aid payment percentage. [Payment of aids and credits to school districts]
Clarifies the state aid payment schedule for certain early childhood education 
programs that were transferred from MDE to the Department of Children, Youth, and 
Families (DCYF). 
3 Funding. [School readiness aid] 
Clarifies the state aid administration and payment schedule for the school readiness 
program that was transferred from MDE to DCYF. 
4 Funding. [Voluntary prekindergarten program]
Clarifies the state aid administration and payment schedule for the voluntary 
prekindergarten program that was transferred from MDE to DCYF. 
5 Developmental screening aid.
Clarifies the state aid administration and payment schedule for the developmental 
screening aid program that was transferred from MDE to DCYF.
6 Revenue. [Early childhood family education]
Makes a technical correction to provide a statutory cross-reference to the basic 
revenue formula allowance.
7 Population. [Early childhood family education]
Makes a technical correction to specifically identify that school district population 
data are reported to MDE.
8 Funding. [Early childhood family education]
Clarifies the state aid administration and payment schedule for the early childhood 
family education (ECFE) program that was transferred from MDE to DCYF.
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 28
Section Description – Article 10: Early Childhood Education
9 Appropriations; MDE.
Appropriates money for the kindergarten entry assessment. See Fiscal worksheets at 
https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
10 Appropriations; DCYF.
Appropriates money for certain early education programs administered by the 
Department of Children, Youth, and Families. See Fiscal worksheets at 
https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
11 Appropriations; Office of Higher Education.
Appropriates money for the early childhood and family education teacher shortage 
program. See Fiscal worksheets at 
https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
Article 11: Community Education and Lifelong Learning
This article modifies the adult basic education program approval cycle and appropriates money 
for various community education aid programs.
Section Description – Article 11: Community Education and Lifelong Learning
1 Program approval. [Adult basic education]
Moves the adult basic education program approval from a five-year cycle to a sixyear cycle.
2 Appropriations.
Appropriates money for community education and lifelong learning aid programs. 
See Fiscal worksheets at https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
Article 12: State Agencies
This article establishes new standards for grants administered by the Department of Education; 
modifies educational data requirements; modifies the rulemaking process used for standards 
adoption; makes other changes; and appropriates money to the Department of Education, 
Minnesota State Academies, Perpich Center for Arts Education, and Professional Educator 
Licensing and Standards Board. 
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 29
Section Description – Article 12: State Agencies
1 Directory information. [Educational data]
Requires educational agencies or institutions sharing personal student contact 
information and directory information for students in special education to comply 
with requirements for parental consent under federal regulations.
2 Rulemaking. [Required academic standards]
Requires MDE to adopt academic standards through the regular rulemaking process 
rather than the expedited rulemaking process.
3 Education grants.
Establishes new standards for the Department of Education when awarding or 
administering grants. The new standards prohibit the department from issuing a 
grant or require the cancellation of an existing grant under certain conditions relating 
to federal and state registration and filing requirements. Exempts grants to school 
districts, charter schools, cooperative units, Tribal contract schools, and other 
political subdivisions from the new standards.
4 Excess tax increment.
Directs the county auditor to certify to the commissioner the amount of any excess 
tax increment by February 1 of each year. Modifies the calculation of a school 
district’s aid and levy limitations upon return of excess tax increment or 
decertification of a tax increment financing (TIF) district. (The amendment to 
paragraph (b)(2)(i)(A) is a technical change to correctly reference the name and 
statutory reference of the long-term facilities maintenance (LTFM) program. The 
amendment to paragraph (b)(2)(i)(K) adds the equalized local optional revenue (LOR) 
program to the list of programs adjusted for excess tax increment.) Makes the 
changes to paragraph (a) effective July 1, 2025, and all other changes effective for 
fiscal year 2027. 
5 Report. [Alternative teacher preparation grant program]
Modifies reporting requirement.
6 Appropriations; Perpich Center for Arts Education [FY2024-25 appropriation].
Extends the Perpich Center’s fiscal year 2024 appropriation for furniture replacement 
until June 30, 2027. Expands the allowable uses of the funds to include equipment 
and technology. Effective immediately.
7 Cancellation; Minnesota Department of Education appropriations.
Cancels the remaining portions of two appropriations in fiscal year 2024/2025 to 
MDE that would otherwise go unspent by reducing the appropriation for the Office of 
Chapter 10
2025 First Special Session
Minnesota House Research Department Page 30
Section Description – Article 12: State Agencies
Inspector General by $1,500,000 and the appropriation for activities related to the 
proposed new special education rule for specific learning disabilities by $500,000.
8 Appropriations; Department of Education.
Appropriates money for the Department of Education. See Fiscal worksheets at 
https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
9 Appropriations; Minnesota State Academies.
Appropriates money for the Minnesota State Academies for the Deaf and the Blind. 
See Fiscal worksheets at https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
10 Appropriations; Perpich Center for Arts Education.
Appropriates money for the Perpich Center for Arts Education. See Fiscal worksheets
at https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
11 Appropriations; Professional Educator Licensing and Standards Board.
Appropriates money for the Professional Educator Licensing and Standards Board. 
See Fiscal worksheets at https://www.house.mn.gov/Fiscal/Home/TrackingSheets. 
Article 13: Forecast
This article makes adjustments to fiscal year 2025 education appropriations enacted during the 
2023 and 2024 legislative sessions to match forecast data. The adjusted amounts in each of the 
appropriations sections included in this article reflect the February 2025 Forecast of revenue 
and expenditures. The forecast aid levels are the best estimates of the state aid required for 
each K12 program and appropriation. Changes in the appropriations are real and the changes 
must be enacted in law, but forecast adjustments have no fiscal impact when measured against 
the K12 budget because the changes are built into the forecast estimate of the budget base.
Minnesota House Research Department provides nonpartisan legislative, legal, and 
information services to the Minnesota House of Representatives. This document 
can be made available in alternative formats.
www.house.mn.gov/hrd | 651-296-6753 | Third Floor, Centennial Office Building | St. Paul, MN 55155