Act Summary
Chapter 109
2024 Regular Session
Subject: Education Policy
Bill: S.F. 3567
Analysts: Cristina Parra, Tim Strom, Annie Mach
Date: May 17, 2024
Source: https://www.house.mn.gov/hrd/as/93/as109.pdf
Captured: 2026-07-01

---

Overview
This act modifies early childhood through grade 12 education provisions relating
to literacy instruction, special education teachers, charter school governance and
transparency, preschool programs, American Indian mascots, and access to
library materials, and makes other changes.

Article 1: General Education
This article requires districts to adopt cell phone policies, modifies the postsecondary
enrolment options act, modifies flexible learning year program requirements, and makes other
changes.

Section Description - Article 1: General Education
1 School cell phone policy.
Requires districts and charter schools to adopt a policy on students' possession and
use of cell phones in school by March 15, 2025. Requires the principals' associations
to collaborate to make best practices available to schools on strategies to minimize
the impact of cell phones on student behavior, mental health, and academic
attainment.

2 Authorization; notification. [PSEO]
Requires a postsecondary institution to notify a pupil's school as soon as practicable
if the student withdraws from the enrolled course, or if the pupil has been absent
from a course for 10 consecutive days and the pupil is not receiving instruction at
home, in a hospital, or another facility.

3 Digital instruction. [Online instruction act]
Adds reference to federal law relating to accessibility.

4 Supplemental online courses. [Online instruction act]
Allows a student to enroll in additional courses with an online learning provider
under a separate agreement that involves paying tuition or course fees.

5 Purpose of flexible learning year programs. [Four-day week]
Requires the commissioner to establish clear criteria for evaluating a district's
application to use a four-day school week plan, accept applications for a four-day
week plan, and determine whether an application meets the criteria. Requires
approval of a four-day plan to remain in effect for at least six years.

6 Lease purchase; installment buys. [Capital levies]
Substitutes references to desegregation plans with references to achievement and
integration plans. Adds cross-reference to statutory definition of "acquisition" in
chapter on municipal debt. Modifies review and comment requirements for school
construction projects funded under this subdivision.

7 Revisor instruction.
Instructions the revisor of statutes to remove the term "state-approved" in sections
125A.15 (placement of a child with a disability in another district for care and
treatment), 125A.51 (placement of a child without a disability who is placed in care
and treatment for an illness or disability), and 125A.515 (placement of students in
residential facilities) for education in care and treatment facilities.

Article 2: Education Excellence
This article renames the state school accountability system, makes technical changes to
statutes on state assessments, extends the deadline for schools to change mascots, establishes
protections for student journalists, and makes other changes.

Section Description - Article 2: Education Excellence
1 Directory information. [Educational data]
Allows an educational agency or institution to share personal student contact
information and directory information for students in special education with
postsecondary transition planning and services, with the Department of Employment
and Economic Development as required to coordinate services to students with
disabilities.

2 Absence from school for religious and cultural observances.
Requires a district to make reasonable efforts to accommodate a student who wishes
to be excused from a curricular activity for an American Indian cultural practice,
observance, or ceremony.

3 Required academic standards.
Strikes language that the department may modify SHAPE standards, which are used
for physical education, and requirement that the department make available sample
physical education assessments.

4 World language and culture; proficiency certificates. [Elective standards]
Modifies description of proficiency required to obtain the Minnesota World Language
Proficiency Certificate.

5 State bilingual and multilingual seals. [Elective standards]
Modifies description of how proficiency is measured to qualify for bilingual or
multilingual seals. Allows a student to obtain a seal for showing proficiency in an
Indigenous American Indian language. Strikes requirement that a student
demonstrate mastery of English language proficiency to obtain a seal. Requires the
commissioner to establish guidelines on interpreting scores or ratings from approved
assessments.

6 Graduation requirements. [Credits]
Delays requirement that students complete a course in government and citizenship
in grade 11 or 12 by one year. Modifies credit requirement necessary to satisfy the
state standards in physical education.

7 School district process for reviewing curriculum, instruction, and student
achievement goals; striving for comprehensive achievement and civic readiness.
Renames the world's best workforce statute. Directs school districts to include goals
for preparing students to be lifelong learners.

8 Planning for students' successful transition to postsecondary education and
employment; personal learning plans.
Requires a student's personal learning plan to be reviewed at least annually to
ensure the student is on track for graduation.

9 Rigorous course taking information; AP, IB, and PSEO. [Advanced Placement and
International Baccalaureate programs]
Modifies deadline for department report on rigorous course taking. Requires 2025
report to include data from the 2022-2023 and 2023-2024 school years.

10 Assessments. [General requirements; statewide assessments]
Changes cross-reference based on recodification of assessment statutes.

11 Test administration. [General requirements; statewide assessments]
Strikes requirement for accommodations or alternative assessments.

12 Retaliation prohibited. [General requirements; statewide assessments]
Prohibits retaliation against an employee who discloses information to the
commissioner or a parent or guardian about service disruptions or technical
interruptions related to administering assessments.

13 General requirements; test design.
Strikes language added in other sections and obsolete language, adds language
stricken in other sections.

14 Assessment reporting requirements.
Strikes language added in other sections, adds language stricken in other sections.
Strikes requirement that commissioner report data comparing performance results
among school sites, school districts, Minnesota and other states, and Minnesota and
other nations. Allows a school, district or charter school to provide a student's parent
access to student's individual student performance data and achievement report
when it is made available to the school, district, or charter school.

15 Student performance data.
Strikes requirement that commissioner aggregate and disaggregate student data to
report student performance and growth levels, and student learning and outcome data.

16 School performance reports and public reporting.
Delays deadline for department to post school performance reports on the
department's website in years with new performance standards.

17-20 Prohibition on American Indian mascots.
Allows school districts with an American Indian mascot, nickname, logo, letterhead,
or team name one additional year, until September 1, 2026, to comply with the
prohibition on American Indian mascots. Requires a district with a prohibited mascot
to report to the legislature on its progress to comply with prohibition.

21 Student journalism; student expression.
Establishes right of student journalists to exercise freedom of speech and freedom of
the press in school-sponsored media. Prohibits retaliation against student journalists
or media advisers. Requires districts and charter schools to adopt a student journalist
policy.

22 Language access plan.
Starting in the 2025-2026 school year, requires a district to adopt a language access
plan that includes the district's process and procedures to render effective language
assistance to students and adults who communicate in a language other than English.

23 Boards shall not withhold grades or diplomas for nonpayment of student fees.
Clarifies that the protections of the Fee Law for fee debt balances apply to Tribal
contract schools.

24-27 PSEO modifications.
Modifies various deadlines and reporting requirements for postsecondary enrollment
options (PSEO) programs, including concurrent enrollment advisory board membership
and grade point average weighting policies.

28-29 English learner requirements.
Modifies deadline for providing notice to parents of English learners and requires
districts to provide effective language development instruction.

30 Alternative to publishing.
Allows listed districts to publish their official proceedings on their websites instead of
in a newspaper. Expires August 1, 2026.

31-32 Revisor instruction and repealer.

Article 3: Teachers
This article modifies requirements for Tier 1 and Tier 2 special education teachers, teacher
evaluation requirements, and PELSB report deadlines, and makes other changes.

Key provisions:
- Modifies requirements for Tier 1 and Tier 2 special education licenses
- Requires teacher evaluation rubric to be based on standards of effective practice
  established in rules (effective July 1, 2025)
- Modifies PELSB teacher supply and demand report deadline
- Encourages training on ableism and disability justice
- Prohibits a district from placing a teacher in a teaching assignment if the teacher
  has been criminally charged with certain offenses
- Requires coach contract nonrenewal notice within 60 days of end of regular season

Article 4: Read Act
This article modifies literacy instruction requirements.

Key provisions:
- Requires districts to screen students in grades K-3 three times each school year
  (including by February 15 each year)
- Requires districts to use only evidence-based literacy interventions starting 2025-2026
- Sets two phases for teacher literacy training:
  Phase 1: Complete by July 1, 2026
  Phase 2: Complete by July 1, 2027
- Requires department to partner with CAREI to approve literacy intervention models
- Requires PELSB to audit teacher preparation programs for reading standards

Article 5: Special Education
Key provisions:
- Updates age definition for developmental delay in ECSE to include children 3-6
- Allows stand-alone assessment for developmental adapted physical education
- Establishes special education licensure reciprocity working group

Article 6: Charter Schools
Key provisions:
- Modifies CMO/EMO definitions (CMO = nonprofit, EMO = for-profit)
- Modifies board of directors requirements (prohibits administrator from serving on
  board; prohibits person from serving on more than one charter school board)
- Requires board meetings to be posted within 30 days
- Requires charter schools to adopt procurement policy before expending state funds
- Requires competitive bid process for procurement contracts over $25,000
- Prohibits a charter school from contracting with a CMO or EMO to provide
  necessary teachers

Article 7: Nutrition and Libraries
Key provisions:
- Modifies eligibility to become a sponsor for federal meal programs
- Prohibits public libraries from banning or restricting access to materials based
  solely on viewpoint, message, idea, or opinion
- Requires library governing body to adopt a policy for selection and reconsideration
  of library materials

Article 8: Health and Safety
Key provisions:
- Requires mental health instruction for students in grades 4-12 starting 2026-2027
- Requires secondary schools to provide students access to space for mental health
  care through telehealth (starting October 1, 2024)
- Requires MN State High School League to provide coaches with eating disorder
  prevention education resources

Article 9: Early Learning
Key provisions:
- Merges school readiness plus program into voluntary prekindergarten (VPK) program
  (effective July 1, 2025)
- Modifies VPK eligibility and fee structure
- Adds children in substance use/mental health treatment and children with IEP/IFSP
  to priority groups for early learning scholarships

Article 10: State Agencies
Key provisions:
- Establishes Military Interstate Children's Compact State Council
- Requires department to designate Purple Star Schools starting 2026-2027

---
Minnesota House Research Department provides nonpartisan legislative, legal, and
information services to the Minnesota House of Representatives.
www.house.mn.gov/hrd | 651-296-6753 | 155 State Office Building | St. Paul, MN 55155
